487
KEY POINTS
Inhaled Anesthetics:
Mechanisms of Action
MISHA PEROUANSKY, ROBERT A. PEARCE, HUGH C. HEMMINGS, and
NICHOLAS P. FRANKS
19
Despite the widespread clinical use of general anesthetics,
our current understanding of their molecular, cellular,
and network mechanisms is incomplete. This critical gap
in the pharmacology of one of medicine’s most important
drug classes not only impedes rational use of available
anesthetics but also hinders the development of newer
anesthetics that might selectively achieve the desirable
end points of anesthesia with fewer adverse cardiovascu-
lar, respiratory, and possibly neuropathologic side effects.
Although major progress has been made in understand-
ing the pharmacology of the intravenous anesthetics by
molecular genetic approaches, the actions of the inhaled
anesthetics at the molecular and cellular levels are more
enigmatic. It is still not possible to trace precisely the
sequence of events that leads from inhaled anesthetic-
target interactions, through ascending levels of biologic
complexity, to the various behavioral effects that charac-
terize the composite state of clinical anesthesia in humans.
Nevertheless, investigations continue to reveal funda-
mental principles of action and have led to a framework
for understanding anesthetic effects at different organiza-
tional levels.
The focus of this chapter is on the mechanisms involved
in the principal therapeutic effects (anesthesia) and on the
side effects of the inhaled anesthetics (Fig. 19.1), a chemi-
cally and pharmacologically diverse group that includes
!□! !Anesthesia consists of separable and independent components, each of which involves distinct,
but possibly overlapping, mechanisms at different sites in the central nervous system.
!□! The potencies of general anesthetics correlate with their solubility in oil, indicating the impor-
tance of interactions with predominantly hydrophobic targets.
!□! General anesthetics act by binding directly to amphiphilic cavities in proteins. Binding sites
have been identified by a combination of site-directed mutagenesis and high-resolution struc-
tural analysis of anesthetic binding.
!□! Mutations made to render putative protein targets insensitive to inhaled anesthetics have been
expressed in mice but have not generated breakthroughs analogous to the success of this strat-
egy with intravenous anesthetics.
!□! The effects of inhaled anesthetics cannot be explained by a single molecular mechanism.
Rather, several targets contribute to the component actions comprising the anesthetic effects
of each anesthetic. However, these effects do converge on a limited number of states underly-
ing the behavioral effects.
!□! The immobilizing effect of inhaled anesthetics involves actions in the spinal cord, whereas
sedation/hypnosis and amnesia involve supraspinal mechanisms that interact with endogenous
memory, sleep, and consciousness pathways and networks.
!□! Volatile inhaled anesthetics enhance inhibitory synaptic transmission postsynaptically by
potentiating ligand-gated ion channels activated by γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine,
extrasynaptically by enhancing GABA receptors, and presynaptically by enhancing basal GABA
release.
!□! Inhaled anesthetics suppress excitatory synaptic transmission presynaptically by reducing
glutamate release (volatile anesthetics) and postsynaptically by inhibiting excitatory ionotropic
receptors activated by glutamate (gaseous and to some extent volatile anesthetics).
!□! Inhaled anesthetics directly activate certain two-pore-domain potassium channels, which is
likely to result in both pre- and post-synaptic effects.
!□! There is as yet no comprehensive theory of anesthesia that describes the sequence of events
leading from the interaction between an anesthetic molecule and its targets to the behavioral
effects.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	488
the potent halogenated ether (isoflurane, sevoflurane, des-
flurane, enflurane) and alkane (halothane) volatile anes-
thetics and the inorganic gaseous anesthetics (nitrous
oxide and xenon). This critical summary of the current
state of knowledge begins with an historical overview
and a review of the behavioral end points of anesthesia.
We then trace, where possible, inhaled anesthetic effects
through ascending levels of organization from molecules,
cells, circuits, networks, and organs to mammalian behav-
ior. We also briefly address studies of anesthetic effects in
very simple model organisms, with anesthetic end points
being identified that as yet bear uncertain relationships to
those in mammals. 1
History
THE UNIFIED PARADIGM OF ANESTHETIC
THEORIES
The first monograph reporting experimental work on anes-
thetic mechanisms, proposing a soon-to-be discredited
lipid-elution theory of anesthetic action, was published
only 6 months after Morton’s public demonstration of ether
anesthesia in Boston’s Ether Dome. For decades thereafter,
the phenomenon of anesthesia puzzled, inspired, and awed
those who tried to understand it. An influential paradigm
of anesthetic action formulated by Claude Bernard in the
1870s posited that anesthesia was a “unified” phenome-
non―a unitary mechanism applicable to all forms of life.
Although the anesthetized state could be brought about by a
variety of agents, its essence was the same in all living crea-
tures. In fact, Bernard thought that life itself was defined by
susceptibility to anesthesia. Bernard also proposed a more
specific theory of anesthesia, coagulation of protoplasm,
which competed with a number of coexisting theories
entertained by the scientific community. In a major work
published in 1919, Hans Winterstein2 summarized the per-
plexing diversity of anesthetic theories by listing more than
600 references, the majority to original laboratory work—a
convincing testimony to the interest of the scientific world
in this phenomenon. Of note, the work of Meyer and Over-
ton at the end of the nineteenth century had only a limited
effect on the trajectory of research until the 1960s. Only
then was the striking simplicity of the Meyer-Overton cor-
relation (Fig. 19.2A) of anesthetic potency with solubility
in olive oil interpreted by the majority of researchers to indi-
cate that lipids are likely to be the anesthetic target. This
interpretation focused attention on anesthetic effects on
the bulk physical properties of cell membranes, which were
known to consist primarily of lipid molecules. Such non-
specific or “lipoid-based” anesthetic theories dominated the
field from the 1960s to the 1980s.!
MINIMUM ALVEOLAR CONCENTRATION―A
BRIDGE BETWEEN PAST AND PRESENT
The potencies of inhaled anesthetics for immobilization
were established in the classic studies in the 1960s of Eger
and colleagues, 3,4 who defined the minimum alveolar con-
centration (MAC) as the inhaled anesthetic atmospheric
pressure required to prevent movement in response to a
defined noxious stimulus in 50% of subjects. The concept
of MAC evolved within a unitary paradigm of anesthetic
action and also reflected the priorities of clinical practice.
As a result, prevention of movement (immobility) became a
Fig. 19.1 Structures of some representative general anesthetics and a nonimmobilizer (F6). The colors are bromine (brown), carbon (black), chlorine
(green), fluorine (cyan), hydrogen (gray), nitrogen (blue), oxygen (red), and xenon (magenta). Note that halothane, isoflurane, desflurane, and F3 all con-
tain a chiral carbon; therefore each exists as two mirror-image enantiomers (only one enantiomer is shown). Also, the nonimmobilizer F6 contains two
chiral carbons and exists as two trans enantiomers and one cis stereoisomer (only one of the enantiomers is shown).
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	489
universal yardstick for anesthetic effects, presumed to occur
in the brain. Moreover, the simple elegance of the relation-
ship between anesthetic potency and lipid solubility (see
Fig. 19.2A) graphically illustrated Meyer and Overton’s
conclusion that “All chemically indifferent substances that
are soluble in fat are anesthetics. Their relative potency as
anesthetics will depend on their affinity to fat on the one
hand and water on the other hand, that is, on the fat/water
partition coefficient.”1 This was interpreted as favoring lip-
ids as the primary targets of anesthetics and a single non-
specific theory to explain anesthesia. The appeal of a single
unified mechanism to explain anesthesia was (and remains)
intellectually appealing. This focused the bulk of research
efforts on delineating how anesthetic interactions with lipid
membranes might lead to the behavioral changes observed
under anesthesia―the nonspecific lipoid theory.
Because inhaled anesthetic concentrations reflect con-
centrations in the tissues after equilibration, which is most
rapidly achieved for well-perfused organs such as the brain
and heart, MAC is analogous to the plasma concentration
for 50% effect (EC50) for intravenous anesthetics. In clini-
cal applications, MAC is usually expressed as volume per-
cent (vol%), which varies considerably with temperature
owing to the large temperature dependence of partitioning
between the gas phase and condensed phases (be they water,
lipids, or proteins), whereas the equivalent condensed-
phase molar concentrations are much less dependent on
temperature.5 The MAC concept provided researchers and
clinicians with a universal standard whereby to measure a
defined anesthetic end point (immobility), making mean-
ingful comparisons of experimental results possible and
accelerating clinical and laboratory research into anes-
thetic mechanisms. Today, a more nuanced understanding
of MAC considers the structural and functional diversity of
the physiologic targets for the different components of the
anesthetic state.!
SHIFT FROM LIPID- TO PROTEIN-CENTERED
MECHANISMS
Lipid-centered mechanisms of anesthesia prevailed in the
two decades after definition of the MAC concept. Alternative
targets were occasionally proposed but largely neglected by
the scientific mainstream. Experimental inconsistencies of
lipid targets, 6-8 as well as evidence compatible with pro-
teins as primary sites of action,9,10 were largely ignored. A
shift from lipid- to protein-centered mechanisms, however,
began in the late 1970s, owing largely to the discoveries of
Franks and Lieb, 11-15 who in an influential series of publi-
cations demonstrated that not only were lipids implausible
targets but that protein targets were also compatible with
the Meyer-Overton correlation (see Fig. 19.2B)—a proof
of concept that, within a few years, redirected the bulk of
research efforts toward proteins. As a corollary of this reori-
entation, evidence against lipid-based theories was recog-
nized. Examples include the cutoff in anesthetic potency in
homologous series of long-chain anesthetic alcohols 15,16
and the identification of hydrophobic drugs that do not
obey the Meyer-Overton correlation. 1,17 The enantiomeric
selectivity of several anesthetics further strengthened the
case for specific binding sites on proteins because stere-
oselectivity is difficult to reconcile with lipid targets.18-20
Today, there is widespread acceptance of the notion that
lipid bilayers remain essentially unaffected by general
anesthetics 11,21 and that critical signaling proteins (e.g.,
ion channels or ligand-gated receptors) are the relevant
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1–2 	–1 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1–1 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6
A
Methanol
Methanol
Acetone
Ethanol
2-Butanone
Paraldehyde
n-Propanol
n-Butanol
n-Hexanol 	Halothane
Methoxyflurane
n-Pentane
n-Hexane
n-Decanol
n-Nonanol
n-Octanol
Benzyl Alcohol
Chloroform
Diethyl ether
Acetone
n-Propanol
n-Pentanol
n-Heptanol
n-Pentane
n-Hexane
n-Decanol
n-Nonanol
n-Octanol
n-Hexanol Halothane
Methoxyflurane
Benzyl Alcohol
Log
10 (Potency for general anesthesia)
Log10 (Lipid bilayer/water partition coefficient)
n-Butanol
Ethanol
B 
Log
10 (Potency for general anesthesia)
Log10 (Potency for luciferase inhibition)
Fig. 19.2 General anesthetics act by binding directly to proteins. (A)
The iconic Meyer-Overton correlation (c.1900) between anesthetic
potency and the lipid-water partition coefficient was initially inter-
preted as evidence that lipids of nerve membranes were the principal
anesthetic target sites. (B) Progress in the 20th century showed that
general anesthetic potencies correlate equally well with their ability
to inhibit activity of the soluble firefly enzyme luciferase, which is not
a physiologically relevant anesthetic target itself but serves as a lipid-
free model protein for anesthetic binding. Inset, The crystal structure
of luciferase 110 with bound anesthetic (red). (Reprinted with permission
from Franks NP, Lieb WR. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of general
anesthesia. Nature. 1994;367:607–614.)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	490
molecular targets of anesthetic action. 22 The exact identity
of proteins contributing to specific anesthetic end points
continues to be sought, with research addressing not only
the “where” (target) but also the “how” (process) of anes-
thetic mechanisms.!
DIVERSITY OF POTENTIAL ANESTHETIC
TARGETS
At high concentrations in vitro, most inhaled anesthetics
affect the functions of multiple proteins, several of which
might be plausibly connected to the components of the
anesthetic state or anesthetic side effects. However, when
a specific anesthetic end point is considered, anesthetics are
effective in vivo over a very narrow concentration range.
This makes the concentration at which a relevant anes-
thetic effect is observed a critical consideration for deciding
potential relevance. The mechanistic relevance of small
effects observed in vitro at relevant concentrations is less
clear; that is, what effect is too small to be considered rel-
evant to anesthesia?23-25
Whether anesthesia results from the sum of minor per-
turbations at multiple sites or from substantial effects
on a small number of targets remains to be determined.
This should be resolved as more sophisticated molecular
genetics experimental techniques are applied to test the
relevance of putative targets. There are two reasons for
believing that the number of relevant targets may be small.
First, the extreme steepness of anesthetic concentration-
response curves means that, for a given end point, sub-
stantial effects on two or three targets would be sufficient
to account entirely for the in vivo effect. Second, the stere-
oselectivity observed in vivo 26 is comparable to the largest
effects seen in putative targets in vitro, 18,20 suggesting that
only a small number of targets are likely to be involved. Set
against this logic is the experimental evidence that a rather
large number of plausible target proteins are affected, albeit
usually to small extents, and determining which of these
are relevant to the various anesthetic end points remains
a challenge.!
ANESTHESIA: A COMPOSITE
NEUROPHARMACOLOGIC STATE
Along with progress in identifying the molecular mecha-
nisms of anesthesia, our understanding of the nature of
the anesthetic state has evolved. Whereas a drug-induced
coma-like state of general anesthesia can be induced by
inhaled anesthetics administered at appropriate concen-
trations (approximately 1.3 times MAC, equivalent to
the EC 95 of an intravenous anesthetic), the use of such
high concentrations can lead to short- and possibly long-
term side effects. It is now clear that anesthesia consists
of separable and at least partially independent compo-
nents or substates, each of which involves distinct but
possibly overlapping mechanisms in different regions of
the central nervous system (CNS) and with variations in
relative potencies between specific agents. 27 Immobili-
zation, the core measure of MAC, is mediated largely at
the level of the spinal cord by inhaled anesthetics 28,29
but not by barbiturates. 30 On the other hand, the spinal
cord is clearly not the primary site of such phenomena as
amnesia, sedation, and unconsciousness, which rather
are produced by anesthetic effects on cerebral cortical
function (Fig. 19.3). A functional separation between
amnesia and sedation has been demonstrated for intra-
venous anesthetics, 31 and it seems likely that this will
apply to inhaled anesthetics as well. The state commonly
referred to as “unconsciousness” is in itself heteroge-
neous, with evidence for distinct states of unresponsive-
ness and unconsciousness. 32 These and similar findings
have led to the concept that general anesthesia consists
of multiple independent components that can be resolved
experimentally and clinically.
In principle, each component of anesthesia can be pref-
erentially induced in a concentration- and agent-specific
manner using individual cellular/molecular pathways
in various regions of the CNS. For example, injections
of pentobarbital into discrete sites in the mesopontine
tegmentum induce a comatose state, 33,34 whereas seda-
tion induced by systemic administration of propofol can
be reversed by microinjections of γ-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) A receptor antagonists into the tuberomammil-
lary nucleus, a sleep-regulating nucleus in the hypo-
thalamus. 35 Thus general anesthetics produce separate
identifiable anesthetic substates via agent-specific actions
at discrete anatomic sites in the CNS through different
molecular targets. An important consequence of this
complexity is that MAC, which is based exclusively on a
motor response, might not proportionately reflect other
components of anesthesia. Although this heterogeneity
of anesthetic actions complicates a mechanistic under-
standing, it does open the possibility of developing sub-
state-specific drugs.!
0
50
100
0.75	0.50	0.25 	1.0
Responders (%)
MAC fraction
Amnesia
Unconsciousness
Immobility
Fig. 19.3 Several behavioral end points and sites of action underlie
inhaled anesthetic action. Amnesia, the most sensitive anesthetic end
point, probably involves the hippocampus, amygdala, mediotemporal
lobe, and other cortical structures. Unconsciousness likely involves the
cerebral cortex, thalamus, and neuronal pathways of sleep and arousal.
Sedation and hypnosis (loss of responsiveness) are part of the con-
sciousness-unconsciousness continuum and are not shown. Immobil-
ity occurs by anesthetic action in the spinal cord, although supraspinal
effects (dotted arrow) are likely to be important for some anesthetics.
Anesthetic action in the spinal cord blunts ascending impulses arising
from noxious stimulation and might indirectly contribute to anesthetic-
induced unconsciousness and amnesia (dashed arrow). Cardiovascular
responses occur at even greater MAC fractions (not shown). (Courtesy
Joseph Antognini, University of California, Davis, CA.)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	491
Integrated Effects on Central
Nervous System Function
IMMOBILITY
Electroencephalography as a monitor of brain activity has
been applied both to the study of anesthetic mechanisms
and as a monitor of the anesthetic state. Failure to find a
correlation between quantitative electroencephalographic
activity and immobility in response to noxious stimulation
led to the somewhat radical (at the time) hypothesis that
immobility was not a cerebral cortex–mediated phenom-
enon.36 Experimental demonstration that volatile anes-
thetics act on the spinal cord to suppress movement28,29
supported this hypothesis and was a major factor leading
to the contemporary separation of anesthetic substates,
of which immobility requires the highest drug concentra-
tions (see Fig. 19.3). Taking advantage of the atypical blood
supply of goat CNS, which allows separate experimental
perfusion of the brain and spinal cord, Antognini and col-
leagues28,37 showed that immobility involves anesthetic
effects at the spinal level because selective delivery of iso-
flurane or halothane only to the brain required 2.5-fold to
4-fold higher concentrations compared with delivery to the
whole CNS. At the same time, experiments by Rampil and
colleagues29 that used surgical separation of the forebrain
and midbrain from the spinal cord in rats led to the con-
clusion that immobilization involves primarily suppression
of the nocifensive withdrawal reflex arc at the level of the
spinal cord (Fig. 19.4).
In the 25 years since the identification of the spi-
nal cord as the site of anesthetic-induced immobility,
research has centered on pharmacologic, genetic, and
complex network approaches. The conventional phar-
macologic approach (“bulk” administration of agonists
and antagonists into the CNS) to identify receptor-level
contributions to isoflurane-induced immobility (isoflu-
rane being the standard potent ether for experimental
purposes) has severe limitations in the complex networks
of the CNS. Nevertheless, it yielded at least one surpris-
ing insight―that actions at GABA A receptors appear not
to be important for the end point of immobility, at least
where inhalational agents are concerned. 38 Anesthetic-
resistant transgenic mice confirmed that GABA A recep-
tors containing α1- or α3-subunits do not contribute to
the immobilizing action of isoflurane. 39,40 Perhaps less
surprisingly, inhibition of central nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors also plays no role in immobilization. 41 A role for
voltage-gated sodium (Na + ) channels was suggested by
the finding that intrathecal administration of a selective
inhibitor of Na + channels potentiates anesthetic immobil-
ity (reduces MAC), whereas an enhancer of Na + channel
activity does the opposite. 42
In contrast, work in mutant mice suggests a potential
role for tandem-pore domain potassium channels (K2P)
in anesthetic-induced immobility. Global knockout mice
lacking the TASK-1, TASK-3, and TREK-1 K2P channels
are less sensitive to volatile but not intravenous anesthet-
ics,43-46 indicating a role for these channels possibly by a
presynaptic mechanism. 47 An important limitation is that
global knockout results almost invariably in wide-ranging
compensatory changes in the molecular landscape of the
organism with unpredictable consequences for the phe-
nomenon under investigation.
Work with ex vivo preparations that attempt to pre-
serve parts of the complex spinal cord circuitry suggests
that anesthetic inhibition of afferent (noxious sensory)
input to the dorsal horn plays a subordinate role to the
suppression of the efferent (motor) output from the ven-
tral horn, although this may vary by specific agent. This
motor output is coordinated by neuronal networks orga-
nized in so-called central pattern generators that control
the activity of cholinergic motoneurons. 48 Not unlike
understanding the anesthetic effects on higher cognitive
function, the key to understanding immobility will likely
lie in resolving the effect of anesthetics on integrated
spinal network activity after understanding the circuit
physiology.!
UNCONSCIOUSNESS
Compared with the other end points of anesthesia, research
into the biologic basis of anesthetic-induced unconscious-
ness is relatively recent, but it has become an area of active
investigation. Research is being conducted in animal mod-
els and human subjects and commercial interests are work-
ing to develop effective depth-of-anesthesia monitors. These
efforts reflect increasing interest, and progress, in “con-
sciousness science” in general.49,50 Moreover, anesthetics
are themselves being used as research tools to help unravel
the neuronal underpinnings of consciousness.
Loss of consciousness (or hypnosis) is a hallmark of the
onset of anesthesia. However, what is commonly referred to
as unconsciousness under anesthesia might be more accurately
described as unresponsiveness, a condition that could also
encompass states of self-awareness without environmental
awareness (as in dreaming) or environmental awareness
without recall (e.g. conscious amnesia combined with neu-
romuscular paralysis during induction of anesthesia).32,51
Cerebral
cortex
A
B
Noxious
stimulation
Spinothalamic
tract
Fig. 19.4 Inhaled anesthetics produce immobility at the spinal level.
(A) Decerebration by removal of the forebrain rostral to the black line
does not alter the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in rats,
indicating that volatile anesthetic immobilization does not depend on
the cerebral cortex.28,29 (B) Anesthetics suppress the nocifensive with-
drawal reflex response to noxious stimulation transmitted to the dorsal
horn by sensory nerves at the spinal level. Current efforts are focused
on identifying the molecular, cellular, and anatomic substrates for this
effect.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	492
Numerous theories have been advanced to explain
anesthetic-induced unconsciousness. They can generally
be divided into those that address “bottom-up” changes in
the brain stem circuitry that controls arousal,52,53 versus
“top-down” changes in the thalamocortical circuits that
integrate information.54 Indeed, this distinction formed
the basis for a recent suggestion that the level of conscious-
ness reflects bottom-up processes whereas the content of
consciousness reflects top-down processes―a notion with
intuitive appeal.55
One of the most influential theories has been the “inte-
grated information theory of consciousness (IITC)” of
Tononi,56 which emphasizes the need for simultaneous dif-
ferentiation between brain states and their integration into
a coherent whole. 57 Drugs or diseases that suppress con-
sciousness could act through either process. Other infor-
mation-based approaches use symbolic analysis, 58 transfer
entropy,59 chaos theory,60 and more. The rich connectivity
of the cerebral cortex and its hierarchical organization are
especially suited to enable high levels of information inte-
gration in the human brain. Some brain areas present a
“rich club” organization (i.e., highly connected nodes tend
to be preferentially connected to other highly connected
nodes), which has been suggested to be optimal for infor-
mation integration.61,62 These hubs are promising targets
for the hypnotic action of general anesthetic drugs.
Anesthetics might act by interfering with the operational
synchronicity and coherence of corticothalamic networks.
Consequent disruption of functional and effective connec-
tivity has been observed during natural slow-wave 63 and
midazolam-induced loss of responsiveness. 64 This break-
down of cortical connectivity, rather than pharmacologic
deafferentation from the environment, could underlie loss
of consciousness.65 Unconsciousness would then be char-
acterized not by the absence but by the fragmentation of
cortical processing.
Although the mechanism of “binding” (i.e., creating the
unity of perception) is uncertain, synchronicity of neu-
ronal activity in the 40- to 90-Hz range across function-
ally connected cortical areas (commonly referred to as
40-Hz- or γ-rhythm) is a viable candidate. Animal 66,67 and
human 68 data implicate activity in the γ-band throughout
the cortex as a network-level target of general anesthet-
ics. Anesthetic actions on cortical information processing
probably consist not merely of suppression of responses but
of reduced complexity and variability reflected counterin-
tuitively in the increased reliability and precision of evoked
responses. 69,70
A consistent and intriguing observation has been that
anesthetics suppress descending more than ascending
neural connectivity. 59,71 Within the framework of predic-
tive coding,72 this indicates that unconsciousness is asso-
ciated with a reduction in internally generated predictions
more than a suppression of incoming sensory information.
The molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying this
effect remain undefined, but the preferential suppression
by isoflurane of cortico-cortical responses in brain slices
in vitro73,74 supports a top-down mechanism wherein the
anesthetic acts directly on the thalamocortical circuitry.
By contrast, “bottom-up” theories attribute changes
in consciousness to anesthetic modulation of subcortical
arousal nuclei. An interesting theme has emerged from
this line of research. There is substantial overlap between
the centers whose activity is altered during natural slow-
wave sleep and the state of general anesthesia.35,75–77
That is, many anesthetics may induce unconsciousness, at
least in part, by “hijacking” neural sleep 78,79 or arousal 80
pathways.
Thalamic theories of anesthetic-induced unconscious-
ness81,82 incorporate aspects of both top-down and bot-
tom-up mechanisms, reflecting not only the intermediate
position of this structure in the hierarchical organization
of the brain but also the different connection patterns of
“sensory relay” versus higher-order “nonspecific” thalamic
nuclei.83!
LEARNING AND MEMORY
Anterograde amnesia, one of the core desirable anesthetic
end points, is achieved at lower anesthetic concentrations
(∼0.25 MAC) than those required for unconsciousness (∼0.5
MAC). Perhaps the closest analogue in rodents to explicit
memory in humans is medial temporal lobe–dependent
learning of temporal and spatial sequences known as hippo-
campus-dependent spatial learning. Other learning paradigms,
such as fear conditioning to tone, are by contrast indepen-
dent of the hippocampus. Spatial learning can be tested by
a variety of experimental paradigms, including fear condi-
tioning to context (Fig. 19.5). Isoflurane and the nonimmo-
bilizer F6 both inhibit hippocampus-dependent learning at
about half the concentration necessary for disrupting hip-
pocampus-independent learning.84 Similarly, anesthetic
concentrations that inhibit explicit memory in humans
(memory that can be explicitly recalled as opposed to motor
learning, classical conditioning, and so on) are similarly
lower than concentrations that impair implicit memory
(not subject to willful recollection). 85 Taken together, these
findings implicate effects on function of the medial temporal
lobe, including the hippocampus, in the suppression of
explicit memory by anesthetics. Effects on other structures,
such as the amygdala, may be relevant to anesthetic impair-
ment of implicit or other types of memory.86
Because inhaled anesthetics affect multiple cellular
targets even at amnesic concentrations, it is likely that
anesthetic-induced amnesia arises from multiple cellular-
level changes. A quantitative comparison of the degree of
change in synaptic inhibition in the hippocampus produced
by equiamnestic concentrations of isoflurane versus etomi-
date indicated that the enhancement of GABAergic inhibi-
tion can account for a substantial portion of isoflurane’s
effect on memory.87 Other contributing targets may include
nAChRs,88 HCN1 channels,89 and excitatory glutamater-
gic synapses,90 Conversely, it is also likely that suppression
of learning and memory by drugs known to have differ-
ent receptor affinities share common mechanisms at some
level of integration. For example, θ-rhythms (4-12 Hz) are
clearly important for hippocampus-dependent learning
and memory.91 Benzodiazepines92 and cannabinoids93
slow and suppress hippocampal θ-rhythms in proportion
to their ability to impair hippocampus-dependent learning.
Isoflurane and the nonimmobilizer F6 have comparable
effects on θ-rhythms at amnesic concentrations while hav-
ing different receptor-level profiles and opposite effects on
sedation.94 Thus alterations in neuronal synchrony may
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	493
provide a common network-level substrate for memory
impairment. The synchronization between amygdalar and
hippocampal θ-rhythms that occurs during fear memory
retrieval indicates that this principle might also apply to
other forms of memory and their impairment by anesthet-
ics.95 As with other components of the anesthetic state, the
precise mechanisms of memory impairment by anesthetics
and of memory itself remain to be fully elucidated.!
SEDATION
Sedation (defined as a decrease in activity, alertness,
arousal, and/or vigilance), which is on a behavioral con-
tinuum leading to hypnosis, is achieved at anesthetic doses
similar to those that produce amnesia (<0.5 MAC). There
is no clear mechanistic or clinical separation between seda-
tion and hypnosis. By contrast, even though sedation can
be difficult to separate from amnesia, for intravenous anes-
thetics there may be separate but overlapping substrates for
these two end points.31 The mechanisms involved in these
behavioral effects are likely to resemble those of less pro-
miscuous drugs, for which genetic approaches have been
informative. An amino acid knockin mutation (H101R) in
mice that renders the α1 GABAA receptor subunit insensi-
tive to modulation by benzodiazepines produces resistance
to the sedative and amnesic effects of benzodiazepines while
maintaining other behavioral effects, among them anxioly-
sis.96 The α1 subunit is abundantly expressed in the CNS,
mainly in the cortical areas and thalamus. Volatile anes-
thetics have qualitatively similar effects on α 1-containing
GABA A receptors (but also those containing other sub-
units) at low concentrations. The observation that the non-
immobilizer F6, which is devoid of sedative properties, 94 is
amnesic97 but does not modulate benzodiazepine-sensitive
α1-containing GABA A receptors, 98,99 is compatible with
a role for α1-containing receptors in volatile anesthetic-
induced sedation, because few other targets are affected
at purely sedative concentrations. Possible targets for the
sedative effects of the gaseous anesthetics nitrous oxide
and xenon, which do not affect GABA A receptors, include
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonism100
and K2P channel activation.101 Consistent with this distinct
pharmacologic profile, nitrous oxide has strikingly differ-
ent effects from those of benzodiazepines in behavioral tests
aimed at evaluating sedation in mice.102
Recognizing that there may be more than a superficial
similarity between natural sleep and anesthetic-induced
sedation and hypnosis, the effects of some anesthetics
apparently share natural sleep mechanisms by directly
activating discrete sleep-promoting nuclei in the hypothal-
amus.35 Indeed, the same neurons, or at least overlapping
populations of neurons, that are activated by sleep depriva-
tion are also activated during dexmedetomidine-induced
sedation.103 Electroencephalographic patterns during nat-
ural slow-wave sleep and anesthesia show similarities,104
and recovery from sleep deprivation can occur under pro-
pofol105,106 and inhalational anesthesia, supporting this
concept. Anesthetic effects on other cortical107 and subcor-
tical structures32 may also contribute to anesthetic-induced
sedation and hypnosis.!
0
100
70
60
40
20
0.4	0.2	0.0 	0.6 	0.8 	1.0
Freezing (%)
MAC fraction
F6 context
F6 tone
Isoflurane context
Isoflurane tone
Equilibration
chamber
Training and context
testing chamber
Tone
testing chamber
Speaker
Speaker
Shock
grid
Fig. 19.5 Differential sensitivity of different types of learning to anesthetics and nonimmobilizers. Freezing in anticipation of a noxious stimulus is a
measure of learning in rats; less freezing indicates less learning. Left, the learning protocol involves preequilibration of rats in the equilibration chamber
to isoflurane or the nonimmobilizer F6 at the desired concentration before placement into the training chamber. For testing of memory to context,
the training and test chamber are identical. For testing of memory to tone, training and testing take place in different chambers. Right, hippocampus-
dependent learning (fear conditioning to context, closed symbols) is inhibited by isoflurane (purple circles) at lower concentrations than hippocampus-
independent learning (fear conditioning to tone, purple squares). This differential sensitivity is mirrored by the nonimmobilizer F6 (blue circles and
blue squares for context and tone, respectively). (Left panel adapted with permission from Eger EI 2nd, Xing Y, Pearce R, et al. Isoflurane antagonizes
the capacity of flurothyl or 1,2-dichlorohexafluorocyclobutane to impair fear conditioning to context and tone. Anesth Analg. 2003;96:1010–1018; right
panel data points reconstructed from Dutton RC, Maurer AJ, Sonner JM, et al. Short-term memory resists the depressant effect of the nonimmobilizer
1-2-dichlorohexafluorocyclobutane (2N) more than long-term memory. Anesth Analg. 2002;94:631–639; and Dutton RC, Maurer AJ, Sonner JM, et al. The
concentration of isoflurane required to suppress learning depends on the type of learning. Anesthesiology. 2001;94:514–519.)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	494
Identification of Molecular Sites
of Anesthetic Action
CRITERIA FOR IDENTIFYING SITES RELEVANT TO
ANESTHESIA
Specific criteria have been proposed to evaluate the rel-
evance of the many potential molecular targets of anesthet-
ics.108 These criteria include the following:
1. Reversible alteration of target function at clinically rel-
evant concentrations. This criterion requires comparable
in vivo and in vitro sensitivities and depends on the
anesthetic end point under consideration. For example,
targets involved in immobility must be sensitive to anes-
thetics near MAC, whereas targets mediating amnesia
must be affected at a fraction of MAC. Recent evidence
for persistent effects of inhaled anesthetics demonstrable
in the absence of continued anesthetic exposure is chal-
lenging the notion of reversibility for certain effects.
2. Expression of the target in appropriate anatomic locations
to mediate the specific anesthetic end point. For example,
immobilization by inhaled agents appears to involve pri-
marily actions in the spinal cord independent of actions
in the brain.
3. Concordant stereoselectivity of anesthetic effects in vivo and
on the target in vitro. Without a specific pharmacologic
antagonist of anesthesia, correlation between the ste-
reoselective actions of general anesthetics in vivo and
in vitro is a useful test of pharmacologic relevance of
putative molecular targets. Stereoselectivity data cor-
relating in vivo potency and in vitro receptor actions
implicate GABA A receptors as a target for the anesthetic
actions of etomidate, pentobarbital, neurosteroid anes-
thetics, and isoflurane.
4. Appropriate sensitivity or insensitivity to anesthetic and
nonanesthetic 	compounds. 	Anesthetic 	halogenated
cyclobutanes together with structural analogs that do
not produce anesthesia at concentrations predicted to
be anesthetic by the Meyer-Overton correlation (nonim-
mobilizers) can be used to discriminate relevant volatile
anesthetic targets in vitro. For example, the anesthetic
F3 (1-chloro-1,2,2-trifluorocyclobutane), but not the
structurally similar nonanesthetic F6 (1,2-dichloro-
hexa fluorocyclobutane), affect GABAA , glycine, AMPA
(α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic
acid), kainate, and 5-HT3 receptors; and Na+ channels,
consistent with possible roles in immobility, whereas
both F3 and F6 affect neuronal nicotinic, M1 mus-
carinic, 5-HT2C, and mGluR5 receptors, indicating
that these targets are not involved in immobility. F6 is
interesting in that it lacks sedative and immobilizing
effects but does possess amnesic effects, hence use of the
more accurate term nonimmobilizer, making it a useful
pharmacologic tool for discriminating targets for these
actions.
5. Predictable effects of genetic manipulations targeted to
putative molecular targets. The effects of targeted dele-
tion of specific molecules implicated as anesthetic tar-
gets (knockout mutations) or genetic engineering to
introduce specific mutations that modify anesthetic
sensitivity (knockin mutations) in model organisms
provide powerful approaches to test the roles of putative
molecular targets of anesthetic action. This approach
has been particularly successful in implicating specific
GABA A receptor subtypes in the effects of the GABAergic
intravenous anesthetics propofol and etomidate, where
single amino acid substitutions in specific receptor
subtypes eliminate anesthetic effects both in vitro and
in vivo.109 Targeted mutations of putative anesthetic
targets provide a bridge between in vitro observations
and whole-animal experiments essential for demon-
strating anesthetic end points. The existence of multiple
targets and redundancy among ion channel subtypes
makes this a more challenging experimental approach
for inhaled anesthetics compared with intravenous
anesthetics (discussed later).!
PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF
ANESTHETIC BINDING SITES
A convergence of x-ray crystallography, molecular model-
ing, and structure-function studies indicates that inhaled
anesthetics bind in the hydrophobic cavities formed within
proteins.22 The lipophilic (or hydrophobic) nature of these
binding sites explains their adherence to the Meyer-Over-
ton correlation. An element of amphiphilicity (possessing
both polar and nonpolar characteristics) is also required
for effective interaction with these cavities, as indicated by
improvements in the Meyer-Overton correlation with more
amphipathic solvents (possessing both hydrophobic and
hydrophilic properties).7!
FROM MODEL PROTEINS TO RECEPTORS
Identifying inhaled anesthetic binding sites on plausible
target proteins is difficult because of their low-affinity
interactions, the paucity of atomic resolution structures of
pharmacologically relevant target proteins, and the lack of
specific antagonists. Consequently most anesthetic binding
sites have been identified in well-characterized model pro-
teins for which three-dimensional atomic resolution struc-
tures―such as luciferase110 and serum albumin111―are
available but are not themselves relevant to anesthesia.
These studies indicate that anesthetics bind in pockets with
both nonpolar and polar noncovalent chemical interac-
tions.23,112 Binding involves weak hydrogen bond interac-
tions with polar amino acid residues and water molecules,
nonpolar van der Waals interactions, and a polarizing effect
of the amphiphilic binding cavity on the relatively hydro-
phobic anesthetic molecules. Occupation of a site, or sites, by
an anesthetic provides a plausible mechanism for alteration
of receptor and ion channel function by selectively binding
to a particular conformation (e.g., an open or inactivated
state of an ion channel).22 Studies of glycine, GABAA, and
NMDA receptors provide convincing evidence for the exis-
tence of anesthetic binding sites in critical neuronal signal-
ing proteins. 113 It is likely that before long, high-resolution
crystal structures of these receptors will be determined with
inhaled anesthetic bound. However, because anesthetics
act by binding only to certain transient conformational
states, the relevance of necessarily static crystal structures
will have to be assessed with care.
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	495
Structural studies using the more accessible prokary-
otic homologues of eukaryotic ion channels have provided
a powerful tool for the study of anesthetic binding sites in
biologically plausible proteins. For example, both propo-
fol and desflurane have been cocrystalized with Gloebacter
violaceus, a bacterial homologue of eukaryotic inhibitory
ligand-gated ion channels (glycine and GABAA receptors).
Both anesthetics bind to a common preexisting site in the
upper part of the transmembrane domain between the
transmembrane segments of a single subunit (Fig. 19.6).114
Molecular modeling based on structurally homologous
proteins has also been used to identify putative anesthetic
binding sites in the transmembrane domains of vertebrate
GABA A and glycine receptors (Fig. 19.7). These models
Desflurane
A 	B
Intersubunit
cavity
General
anesthetic
cavity
Linking
tunnel	Propofol
Membrane
Fig. 19.6 X-ray structures of propofol and desflurane bound to a pentameric ligand-gated ion channel. (A) Cartoon of membrane-plane view of the
bacterial homologue of mammalian pentameric ligand-gated ion channels (Gloebacter violaceus) with a bound general anesthetic molecule. (B) Molec-
ular surface of the general anesthetic intrasubunit cavities (yellow) and neighboring intersubunit cavities (pink) of the whole pentameric channel.
(Modified from Nury H, Van Renterghem C, Weng Y, et al. X-ray structure of general anaesthetics bound to a pentameric ligand-gated ion channel. Nature.
2011;469:428–433.)
A
B
C
Transmembrane
domain
Cl–
ASN 265
Desflurane
MET 286 	LEU 231
Extracellular
domain	
GABA
ABP
!
!
"
"
#
Fig. 19.7 Putative anesthetic binding sites on γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA A) receptors identified by molecular modeling. (A) Molecular model of the
mouse GABA A receptor built using homology modeling techniques with computational chemistry optimizations and molecular dockings. The amino
acid backbone is displayed in ribbon format and outlined by the transparent solvent-accessible molecular surface. Each of the five subunits is colored
uniquely. The GABA binding site is noted in the extracellular domain, whereas the putative anesthetic binding pocket (ABP) for potentiation is noted in
the outer third of the transmembrane domain between the α and β subunits. Two binding sites are shown but only one has computationally docked
desflurane. (B) A cross-section at the dotted line level in A showing orientation of subunits with pentameric symmetry about a central ion pore. (C) Mag-
nified region of intersubunit anesthetic binding site derived from region in B showing relevant amino acid positions (in space-filling format) interacting
with desflurane (in ball-and-stick format at the same scale). (Courtesy the Bertaccini laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	496
suggest that different drugs may either bind in different
orientations within a single amphiphilic cavity or occupy
different cavities within the protein, causing similar func-
tional effects. Refinement of these molecular models will
continue to provide new insights in the molecular basis for
general anesthetic action that can be experimentally tested.
For example, potential sites of interaction of xenon and
isoflurane with the NMDA receptor have also been identi-
fied using this approach. One site, which can contain up to
three xenon atoms or one molecule of isoflurane, overlaps
the known binding site for the coagonist glycine in the NR1
subunit.115 This suggests that two chemically dissimilar
inhaled anesthetics inhibit NMDA receptors by direct com-
petitive inhibition of coagonist binding.
Molecular Targets of Inhaled Anesthetics
Ion channels have emerged as the most promising molecu-
lar targets for inhaled anesthetics. Neurotransmitter-gated
ion channels―in particular GABA A, glycine, and NMDA-
type glutamate receptors―are leading candidates owing
to their appropriate CNS distributions, essential physiologic
roles in inhibitory and excitatory synaptic transmission,
and sensitivities to clinically relevant concentrations of
anesthetics.22,27,108,116 Other ion channels that are sensi-
tive to inhaled anesthetics include the hyperpolarization-
activated cyclic nucleotide (HCN)-gated family of channels
that give rise to pacemaker currents 116 and regulate den-
dritic excitability, two-pore domain (K 2P ) “leak” K + chan-
nels that maintain resting membrane potential in many
cells,117,118 and voltage-gated Na+ and Ca2+ channels.116!
LIGAND-GATED ION CHANNELS
Potentiation of Inhibitory GABAA and Glycine
Receptors
The ether anesthetics (including isoflurane, sevoflurane, and
desflurane), the alkane anesthetic halothane, most intrave-
nous anesthetics (including propofol, etomidate, barbitu-
rates), and the neurosteroid anesthetics enhance GABAA and
glycine receptor (GlyR) function. GABAA and GlyRs are mem-
bers of the same cys-loop ligand-gated ion channel super-
family that also includes the cation-permeable nicotinic
acetylcholine and 5HT3 receptors. GABAA receptors are the
principal transmitter-gated Cl− channels in the neocortex
and allocortex, whereas GlyRs fulfill this function in the spi-
nal cord, with some overlap in the diencephalon and brain
stem. Activated receptors conduct chloride ions, driving the
membrane potential toward the Cl− equilibrium potential.
Both receptors are inhibitory (except in some cases dur-
ing development) because the Cl− equilibrium potential is
usually more negative than the normal resting potential.
Channel opening also reduces membrane resistance and
“shunts” excitatory responses. Most functional GABAA and
GlyRs are heteropentamers, typically consisting of three
different GABAA subunits (e.g., two α, two β, and one γ or
∂)119 or two different GlyR subunits (three α and two β).120
The subunit composition of GABA A receptors determines
their physiologic and pharmacologic properties and varies
between and within brain areas as well as between differ-
ent compartments of individual neurons. Examples are the
preferential expression of the α5 subunit in the dendritic
field of the hippocampal CA1 area (a region important for
memory formation), of the α4 subunit in the thalamus, and
of the α6 subunit in the cerebellum. Presence of a γ sub-
unit is required for benzodiazepine modulation of GABAA
receptors and can also influence modulation by inhaled
anesthetics. Although the molecular mechanisms of recep-
tor modulation by inhaled anesthetics are not clear, these
receptors have been key to our understanding of anesthetic-
receptor interactions. Using chimeric receptor constructs
between anesthetic-sensitive GABAA and insensitive GlyR
subunits, specific amino acid residues in transmembrane
domains 2 and 3 critical to the action of inhaled anesthet-
ics have been identified.121 This laid the groundwork for the
construction of anesthetic-resistant GABAA receptors and
the generation of transgenic mice with altered anesthetic
sensitivity (discussed later).
The 	related 	cation-permeable 	5-hydroxytryptamine
(serotonin)-3 (5HT 3) receptors are similarly potentiated
by volatile anesthetics. 122,123 5HT 3 receptors are involved
with autonomic reflexes and also probably contribute to the
emetogenic properties of volatile anesthetics.!
Inhibition of Excitatory Acetylcholine and
Glutamate Receptors
Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nnAChRs), like
the other members of the cys-loop family, are heteropenta-
meric ligand-gated ion channels but are cation-selective.
They are composed of α and β subunits but functional
homomeric receptors can be formed by certain α subunits.
In the CNS, nnAChRs are localized primarily presynapti-
cally.124 Homomeric α7 receptors have high permeability
to Ca2+, which can exceed that of NMDA receptors.124 In
contrast to GABA A and GlyRs, nnAChRs pass cations when
activated and therefore depolarize the membrane potential.
Receptors containing α4β2 subunits are very sensitive to
block by isoflurane.125,126 Relevance of nnAChR block to
immobilization, sedation, and unconsciousness by inhaled
anesthetics is unlikely because nnAChRs are also blocked
by nonimmobilizers, although it is possible that they do
contribute to amnesia.
NMDA receptors are a major postsynaptic receptor sub-
type of inotropic receptors for glutamate, the principal
excitatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian CNS. 127
Typical NMDA receptors, defined pharmacologically by
their selective activation by the exogenous agonist NMDA,
are heteromers consisting of an obligatory GluN1 subunit
and modulatory GluN2 subunits. Channel opening requires
glutamate (or another synthetic agonist such as NMDA)
binding to the GluN2 subunit while the endogenous coago-
nist glycine binds to the GluN1 subunit. NMDA receptors
also require membrane depolarization to relieve voltage-
dependent block by Mg 2+. Depolarization is typically pro-
vided by the binding of glutamate to non-NMDA glutamate
receptors (discussed later). Because of this requirement
for both presynaptic transmitter release and postsynaptic
depolarization, synaptic NMDA receptors function as coin-
cidence detectors, and this characteristic is thought to be
central to their role in learning and memory. NMDA recep-
tors are also involved in the development of chronic pain,
perhaps because of mechanisms similar to those underlying
synaptic plasticity, and in ischemia-induced excitotoxicity
by virtue of their capacity to allow entry of the ubiquitous
intracellular signal Ca2+. The nonhalogenated inhaled
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	497
anesthetics xenon, nitrous oxide, and cyclopropane have
minimal effects on GABAA receptors but depress excitatory
glutamatergic synaptic transmission postsynaptically via
NMDA glutamate receptor blockade (Fig. 19.8).128,129
Volatile anesthetics can also inhibit isolated NMDA recep-
tors at higher concentrations.130 Along with presynaptic
inhibition of glutamate release, this might contribute to
their depression of NMDA receptor–mediated excitatory
transmission.
A second class of inotropic glutamate receptors includes
the non-NMDA receptors, which are subdivided into AMPA
and kainate receptors based again on their sensitivities to
selective exogenous agonists. 127 Inhaled anesthetics only
weakly inhibit AMPA receptors; hence this action is unlikely
to be important in their actions.131 Interestingly, kainate
receptors are enhanced by inhaled anesthetics, but this is
unlikely to be involved in immobility because MAC is not
altered in mice deficient in the GluR6 receptor subunit.132
Most evidence suggests that the principal mechanism for
depression of glutamatergic transmission by volatile anes-
thetics is presynaptic, with minor contributions from post-
synaptic receptor blockade 133-135 (see section on “Cellular
Mechanisms”).!
VOLTAGE-GATED AND OTHER ION CHANNELS
Volatile anesthetics have diverse effects on a wide variety of
ion channels that are critically involved in their neurophys-
iologic, cardiovascular, and respiratory actions. A detailed
understanding of these interactions is crucial to a pharma-
cologic description of this essential drug class.
Na+ Channels
Voltage-gated Na + channels are critical to axonal conduc-
tion, synaptic integration, and neuronal excitability. In
contrast to findings in invertebrate giant axons,136 axonal
conduction in small (0.1-0.2 μm) unmyelinated hippocam-
pal axons is depressed by volatile anesthetics, 137,138 and
small reductions in preterminal action potential amplitude
significantly depress transmitter release and hence post-
synaptic responses at a mammalian synapse.139 Heterolo-
gously expressed mammalian voltage-gated Na + channels
are sensitive to clinically relevant concentrations of vola-
tile anesthetics. The Na + channel family consists of nine
homologous pore-forming α subunits with distinct cellular
and subcellular distributions.140,141 Isoflurane and other
volatile anesthetics inhibit the major mammalian Na+
channel isoforms, including neuronal (Nav1.2), skeletal
muscle (Nav1.4), cardiac (Nav1.5), and peripheral (Nav1.8)
isoforms.142 Volatile anesthetics but not nonimmobiliz-
ers also inhibit native neuronal and nerve terminal Na +
channels,141,143-146 lending support to the notion that Na+
channel blockade contributes to the depression of synap-
tic neurotransmitter release. 147 In contrast, xenon has no
detectable effect on Na + , Ca 2+, or K + channels in isolated
cardiomyocytes.148 The demonstration that NaChBac, a
prokaryotic homologue of voltage-gated Na+ channels,
is also inhibited by volatile anesthetics opens the way for
structure-function studies of these channels.145 These stud-
ies suggest that volatile anesthetics affect channel gating,
probably via at least two drug binding sites.149-151!
Ca2+ Channels
Multiple cellular functions depend on the tightly controlled
concentration of intracellular free Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i), which
is determined by the integrated activities of voltage-gated
Ca2+ channels, capacitative Ca2+ channels, plasma mem-
brane and sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca2+-
adenosine triphosphatases (pumps), Na+ /Ca2+ exchangers,
mitochondrial Ca2+ sequestration, and cytoplasmic Ca2+-
binding proteins. Alteration of any of these mechanisms
can affect the many cellular processes regulated by the
second-messenger actions of Ca2+, including synaptic
transmission, gene expression, cytotoxicity, and muscle
excitation-contraction coupling. Excitable cells translate
their electrical activity into action by Ca 2+ fluxes mediated
primarily by voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in the plasma
membrane. Distinct Ca2+ channel subtypes are expressed
in various cells and tissues, and are classified pharmaco-
logically and functionally by the degree of depolarization
required to gate the channel as low voltage–activated
100 	200 	300 	400 	500
0
−2
−4
−6
−8
−10
0
A
200	150	100	50
0
−4
−8
−12
0
B
Time (msec)
Inhibitory postsynaptic current (nA)
+Xenon
+Xenon
+Xenon
20s
Control
Control
GABA
200 pA
Time (msec)
Excitatory postsynaptic current (nA)
Fig. 19.8 The actions of xenon on inhibitory GABAergic and excitatory
glutamatergic synapses in cultured rat hippocampal neurons. Xenon
(3.4 mM, or 1 minimum alveolar concentration [MAC]) has no signifi-
cant effect on the inhibitory postsynaptic current (A) but depresses
the excitatory glutamatergic synaptic current, almost exclusively the
slow N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated component of the cur-
rent (B). In contrast, the principal effects of 1 MAC isoflurane are a pro-
longation in the inhibitory current decay and a reduction in excitatory
current peak height, with little change in time course (not shown, see
Fig. 19.10). (Reprinted in modified form by permission from de Sousa SLM,
et al. Contrasting synaptic actions of the inhalational general anesthetics
isoflurane and xenon. Anesthesiology. 2000;92:1055–1066.)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	498
(LVA; T-type) or high voltage–activated (HVA; L-, N-, R-,
and P/Q-type) channels. Cloning and sequencing to iden-
tify their pore-forming α subunits has allowed molecular
classification of these functionally identified channel sub-
types.141 Considerable evidence indicates that volatile anes-
thetics inhibit certain Ca 2+ channel isoforms but not others.
Inhibition of presynaptic voltage-gated Ca2+ chan-
nels coupled to transmitter release has been proposed as a
mechanism by which volatile anesthetics reduce excitatory
transmission.152,153 Indeed, N-type (Ca v2.2) and P-type
(Cav2.1) channels, which mediate Ca 2+ entry coupled to
neurotransmitter release, are modestly sensitive to volatile
anesthetics154,155 but not in all neuron types,156 suggest-
ing the importance of auxiliary subunits, posttranslational
modification, or other potential modulators of anesthetic
sensitivity. A modest contribution of R-type Ca 2+ channels
(Cav2.3) to anesthesia is suggested by their sensitivity to
volatile anesthetics and a small increase in MAC produced
by genetic deletion in mice.157 T-type Ca2+ channels are
particularly sensitive to volatile anesthetics158 and nitrous
oxide.159 However, mutant mice lacking a major neuronal
T-type Ca2+ channel isoform (Cav3.1) have normal volatile
anesthetic sensitivity, although the onset of anesthesia is
delayed.160 Thus the role that inhibition of these or other
Ca2+ channels plays in the CNS effects of inhaled anesthet-
ics is unclear.
At higher doses, a role for Ca 2+ channel inhibition in the
negative inotropic effects of volatile anesthetics is well estab-
lished. The force of myocardial contraction is determined
by the magnitude of cytosolic Ca 2+ increase after electrical
excitation, the responsiveness of the contractile proteins
to Ca2+, and sarcomere length. Negative inotropic effects
of volatile anesthetics are mediated by reductions in Ca 2+
availability, Ca2+ sensitivity of the contractile proteins, and
rate of cytosolic Ca 2+ clearance. Volatile anesthetics reduce
the Ca 2+ transient and shorten action potential duration
in cardiomyocytes primarily by inhibiting L-type (Ca v1.2)
Ca2+ currents, resulting in a negative inotropic effect and
arrhythmogenicity.161-163 In contrast, xenon does not
depress myocardial function or inhibit L-type Ca2+, Na+, or
K+ currents in isolated cardiomyocytes. 164,165 Inhibition of
trans-sarcolemmal Ca2+ influx through cardiac L-type Ca2+
channels plays a major role in the negative inotropic effects
of volatile anesthetics—greatest for halothane—along with
contributions from effects on myofilament Ca2+ sensitivity
and sarcolemmal Ca2+ release.162,166
In contrast to voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels that regulate
the influx of extracellular Ca 2+, intracellular Ca 2+ channels
regulate Ca2+ release from intracellular stores, particularly
the ER and sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). These include
1,4,5-inositol triphosphate receptors (IP 3Rs), regulated by
the second messenger IP3 , and ryanodine receptors (RyRs);
the latter mediate the release of SR Ca2+, which is critical
to excitation-contraction coupling in muscle. Volatile anes-
thetic–induced Ca 2+ leak occurs by effects on both IP 3R
and RyR channels, which leads to depletion of intracellular
Ca2+ stores from the SR and ER. In brain, volatile anesthetic
activation of IP3Rs has been proposed as a mechanism for
anesthetic neurotoxicity.167 This blunts changes in intra-
cellular Ca 2+ in response to stimulation and contributes
to the smooth muscle–relaxing properties of volatile anes-
thetics that underlie bronchodilation and vasodilation. 168
Malignant hyperthermia is a pharmacogenetic disorder
that manifests as a potentially fatal hypermetabolic crisis
triggered by volatile anesthetics, particularly halothane. It
is often associated with mutations in RyR1 and the physi-
cally associated L-type Ca 2+ channel (Ca v1.1), which func-
tions as the voltage sensor. 169 Volatile anesthetics activate
the mutated RyRs, resulting in uncontrolled intracellular
Ca2+ release from the SR, muscle contraction, and hyper-
metabolic activity.170!
K+, HCN, and TRP Channels
Potassium (K+ ) channels are members of an extremely
diverse ion channel family noted for their varied modes of
activation. They regulate electrical excitability, muscle con-
tractility, and neurotransmitter release. They are important
in determining input resistance and in driving repolariza-
tion after action potentials; thus they determine excitability
and action potential duration. Given the large diversity in
K+ channel structure, function, and anesthetic sensitiv-
ity, it is not surprising that there is considerable diversity
in their sensitivity and response to inhaled anesthetics, 171
from relatively insensitive (voltage-gated K+ channels
Kv1.1, Kv3)172 to sensitive (some members of the K2P fam-
ily), resulting in either inhibition, activation, or no effect on
K+ currents.
Volatile anesthetic activation of certain “leak” K+ chan-
nels was first observed in the snail Lymnaea,173 although
the molecular identity of the affected ion channels was
unknown. Activation of K 2P channels by volatile and
gaseous anesthetics―including xenon, nitrous oxide,
and cyclopropane―was subsequently observed in mam-
mals.118 Increased K + conductance can hyperpolarize neu-
rons, reducing responsiveness to excitatory synaptic input
and possibly altering network synchrony. Targeted deletion
of the TASK-1, TASK-3, and TREK-1 K 2P channels in mice
reduces sensitivity to immobilization by volatile anesthetics
in an agent-specific manner, implicating these channels as
contributory anesthetic targets in vivo. 44-47 The K + chan-
nel TREK-1 also contributes to the neuroprotective effects
of xenon174 and sevoflurane.175
Progress has recently been made in identifying anes-
thetic binding sites to K + channels using photoaffinity label-
ing, which has identified a sevoflurane binding site in the
Kv1.2 channel; this is widely expressed in brain and posi-
tively modulated by volatile anesthetics.176 Molecular mod-
eling has also been used to identify likely binding sites in K2P
channels.177
The recognition that inherited channelopathies are
arrhythmogenic and constitute an important contributor to
sudden cardiac death, 178 particularly in young children, 179
highlights the importance of analyzing anesthetic modula-
tion of cardiac ion channels. Recombinant hERG (human
ether-a-go-go–related) channels are moderately inhibited
by halothane, and their depression likely contributes to
arrhythmogenic effects of volatile anesthetics 162,180; they
are also involved in acquired (drug-induced) and inherited
long QT syndrome. Cardiac inward-rectifying (K IR), voltage-
gated (Kv), and Ca2+-activated K+ channels are generally
relatively insensitive to clinical concentrations of volatile
anesthetics and xenon.162,164,181 In contrast, volatile anes-
thetics and xenon activate cardiac mitochondrial and
sarcolemmal KATP channels,182 which might contribute
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	499
to anesthetic preconditioning to cardiac ischemia. Direct
electrophysiologic effects of anesthetics with precondition-
ing properties have been demonstrated on both mitochon-
drial and sarcolemmal KATP channels, although the precise
mechanisms remain to be clarified. The large conductance
(BK) mitochondrial K + channel Slick of the Slo2 gene fam-
ily has been shown to be important for volatile anesthetic
preconditioning in vivo.183
Volatile anesthetics also inhibit HCN pacemaker chan-
nels, reducing the rate of rise of pacemaker potentials
and the bursting frequency of certain neurons that show
autorhythmicity. They decrease the I h conductance in
neurons184 and modulate recombinant HCN1 and HCN2
channel isoforms at clinically relevant concentrations.185
Because HCN channels contribute to resting membrane
potential, control action potential ring, dendritic integra-
tion, neuronal automaticity, and temporal summation,
and also determine periodicity and synchronization of oscil-
lations in many neuronal networks,186 anesthetic modu-
lation of these channels could play an important role in
anesthetic effects on neuronal integrative functions. Selec-
tive knockout of HCN1 in mouse forebrain shows a role for
these channels in the amnestic and hypnotic but not immo-
bilizing effects of volatile anesthetics.89 !
INTRACELLULAR SIGNALING MECHANISMS
Cell signaling mechanisms are critical to all phases of organ
and cellular function, which has made them attractive
targets for producing the broad effects of general anesthet-
ics on multiple organs. Anesthetics have complex actions
on intracellular cell signaling pathways, which include
processes downstream from cell surface receptors and ion
channels, including effects on second messengers, pro-
tein phosphorylation pathways, and other regulatory
mechanisms.187
G-Protein–Coupled Receptors
A variety of signals―including hormones, neurotrans-
mitters, cytokines, pheromones, odorants, and photons―
produce their intracellular actions by interactions with
metabotropic receptors that activate heterotrimeric gua-
nine nucleotide–binding proteins (G proteins). In contrast
to inotropic receptors that directly couple to ion-selective
channels, G proteins act as indirect molecular switches to
relay information from activated plasma membrane recep-
tors to appropriate intracellular targets.
Heterotrimeric G proteins consist of a large α-subunit
and a smaller β/γ-subunit dimer, each expressed as mul-
tiple isoforms with distinct properties and downstream
targets. G proteins regulate a plethora of downstream
effectors to control the levels of cytosolic second messen-
gers such as Ca 2+ , cyclic adenosine monophosphate, and
inositol triphosphate. These, in turn, regulate effector pro-
teins such as ion channels and enzymes, either directly or
via second messenger–regulated protein phosphorylation
pathways. Ca 2+ is a ubiquitous second messenger that reg-
ulates a number of downstream effectors, often mediated
by the multifunctional Ca 2+ -binding protein calmodulin.
As volatile anesthetics have profound effects on intracel-
lular Ca 2+ concentrations via their effects on both plasma
membrane and intracellular Ca 2+ channels, transporters,
and exchangers (see the section on ion channels earlier),
many of the downstream effects of anesthetics are ulti-
mately mediated by changes in the second-messenger
actions of Ca 2+ .
Drugs that act through G protein–coupled receptors
(GPCRs) such as agonists for μ-opioid and α2-adrenergic
receptors can affect anesthetic sensitivity (reduce MAC).
Inhaled anesthetics can also directly affect signaling via
GPCRs.188 For example, volatile anesthetics activate mul-
tiple olfactory GPCRs in the rat in vivo in a receptor- and
agent-selective manner.189 Analogous effects on related
GPCRs more relevant to critical anesthetic end points are
possible but remain to be demonstrated. The observation
that both volatile anesthetics and nonimmobilizers inhibit
mGluR5 glutamate receptors, 5-HT2A serotonin recep-
tors, and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors suggests
that these GPCR effects do not contribute to anesthetic
immobilization.190-192!
Protein Phosphorylation
Phosphorylation of proteins on specific serine, threonine,
or tyrosine hydroxyl groups, a posttranslational modifica-
tion involved in the regulation of many anesthetic-sensitive
receptors and ion channels, is pivotal to synaptic plastic-
ity (e.g., long-term potentiation [LTP]). Phosphorylation is
controlled by the balance of activity between protein kinases
and phosphatases, several of which are plausible anesthetic
targets. The protein kinase C (PKC) family of multifunc-
tional protein kinases is activated by the lipid-signaling
molecule diacylglycerol and is involved in the regulation of
many ion channels and receptors. Halothane193 and sevo-
flurane194 enhance the activity of some PKC isoforms and
stimulate phosphorylation of specific PKC substrates. Struc-
tural studies have identified a potential binding site in the
diacylglycerol binding domain of PKCδ, consistent with the
ability of certain anesthetics to mimic this natural regula-
tor by binding to the activating site.195 A specific role for a
direct pharmacologically relevant effect related to general
anesthesia mediated by anesthetic activation of PKC or of
any other kinase has yet to be demonstrated. Intrathecal
injection of isoform-specific inhibitors of PKC does not affect
sensitivity to halothane in vivo.196 Knockout mice lacking
the PKCγ isoform show normal sensitivity to halothane
and desflurane while isoflurane MAC was increased, 197
suggesting that PKC is not critical to volatile anesthetic
immobilization.
An important role for effects of volatile anesthetics and
xenon on cell signaling mechanisms has been discovered for
anesthetic-induced preconditioning in the heart and brain
against ischemic damage. 198-202 Anesthetic-induced and
ischemic cardiac preconditioning share critical signaling
mechanisms, including activation of multiple GPCRs (e.g.,
adenosine, opioid, adrenergic) and protein kinases (e.g., src
kinase, PKCδ, PKCε, Akt, mitogen-activated protein kinases
[MAPKs]), and their downstream targets, particularly sar-
colemmal and/or mitochondrial KATP channels, possibly
initiated by changes in reactive oxygen species as the criti-
cal second messenger. 203,204 Volatile anesthetics and xenon
share cardioprotective and neuroprotective effects involv-
ing these signaling pathways.202,205
The effects of anesthetics on the phosphorylation of indi-
vidual residues in specific substrates can be studied using
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	500
phosphorylation state–specific antibodies that are able to
detect the phosphorylated forms of kinase substrates. A
comparison of the effects of three mechanistically diverse
anesthetics (isoflurane, propofol, and ketamine) on critical
intracellular protein phosphorylation signaling pathways
that are known to integrate multiple second messenger
systems reveals both shared and agent-specific actions
in vivo.206 All three anesthetics reduce phosphorylation
of activating sites on NMDA and AMPA glutamate recep-
tors and of the downstream extracellular signal-regulated
kinase ERK2, all of which are known to be involved in syn-
aptic plasticity, consistent with depression of normal gluta-
matergic synaptic transmission in the anesthetized mouse
cerebral cortex. These effects are somewhat selective in that
several other protein kinase A (PKA) substrates examined
are not affected, indicating substrate-specific effects rather
than a general inhibition of PKA activity. 207 Additional
studies will be required to determine which anesthetic
effects on kinase pathways represent direct effects, as occurs
with PKC, and which are indirect because of anesthetic-
induced alterations in signaling molecules known to regu-
late protein kinase and phosphatase activity such as Ca2+
and other second messengers.!
Gene Expression
The ability of general anesthetics to alter gene expres-
sion in the brain was first observed for the highly reactive
immediate early genes c-fos and c-jun.208 Anesthetic effects
on gene expression have since been observed for multiple
anesthetics and organs.209 In the hippocampus of aged rats,
changes in gene expression persisted for up to 2 days in rats
exposed to isoflurane and nitrous oxide, 210 and changes in
protein expression have been observed 3 days after expo-
sure to desflurane. 211 The significance of these changes in
gene and protein expression persisting after recovery from
the classic signs of anesthesia remains to be established (see
review212). Recent findings suggest that certain anesthetic
effects are mediated by epigenetic mechanisms involving
specific posttranslational modifications of DNA-binding
histone proteins by acetylase and deacetylase enzymes. For
example, exposure of neonatal rats to general anesthesia
led to reduced histone 3 acetylation and delayed cogni-
tive deficits that could be reversed by a histone deacetylase
inhibitor.213!
Cellular Mechanisms
NEURONAL EXCITABILITY
Neuronal excitability is determined by resting membrane
potential, threshold for action potential initiation, and
input resistance (an indication of overall channel activ-
ity). Considerable diversity exists for each of these factors
in different types of neurons, and membrane properties dif-
fer not only between neurons but also between compart-
ments (e.g., soma versus dendrite). Moreover, anesthetic
effects vary with the state of the individual neuron—that
is, whether it is hyperpolarized or depolarized, stimulated
by synaptic inputs, or quiescent. Therefore results obtained
using model systems or reduced preparations (e.g. cultured
neurons and brain slices) incompletely reflect anesthetic
effects in vivo. Nevertheless much valuable information has
been obtained using these approaches because they allow
changes in neuronal activity to be attributed to specific cel-
lular and molecular targets.
The intrinsic excitability of spinal motoneurons was
reported to be little affected by halothane,214 but changes
in hippocampal pyramidal neuron excitability were shown
to be substantial and complex. Threshold can be increased
or decreased, and regional differences and dose-dependent
effects on firing patterns have been observed.215,216 Neu-
rons in the ventral-posterior nucleus of the thalamus (pos-
sibly thalamic relay neurons) hyperpolarize in the presence
of isoflurane and are less likely to fire action potentials
because of a decrease in input resistance (increased
shunting)―an effect that has been attributed to increased
K + conductance. 217 Similar effects are observed in hypo-
glossal motoneurons and neurons from the locus coeru-
leus, where a TASK-type K 2P channel has been causally
implicated. 218
GABA A receptors located at extrasynaptic sites can also
influence excitability by increasing membrane conductance
and thereby “shunting” excitatory currents. These recep-
tors have a high affinity for GABA; they are continually
exposed to low ambient GABA concentrations and desen-
sitize slowly. 219 Their importance to anesthesia, however,
may hinge on exactly what these ambient concentrations
are.220 Tonic current in hippocampal pyramidal neurons
arises primarily from α5 subunit–containing GABA A recep-
tors, which are highly sensitive to etomidate, propofol, mid-
azolam, and isoflurane.221-224 Thus they provide a potential
substrate for the amnesic properties of anesthetics. These
same receptors also contribute to slow phasic (synaptic)
currents, which are produced by spillover of GABA from
synapses.225 Their slow time course and location, matching
those of synaptic NMDA receptors, place them in an ideal
position to modulate synaptic plasticity. Indeed, reducing
or eliminating α5-GABAA receptors by pharmacologic or
genetic means attenuates the amnestic properties of the
GABA A receptor-selective anesthetic etomidate. However,
since elimination of α5-GABAA receptors from pyramidal
neurons does not reproduce this effect, 226 modulation of
other cell types (interneurons or glia) may also play a role
in anesthetic-induced amnesia and other anesthetic end
points.!
PRESYNAPTIC VERSUS POSTSYNAPTIC EFFECTS
ON SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION
General anesthetics have potent and specific effects on
synaptic transmission, including presynaptic actions (by
altering transmitter release) and postsynaptic actions (by
altering the postsynaptic responses of neurons to specific
transmitters). The relative contributions of presynaptic
compared with postsynaptic anesthetic effects on synap-
tic transmission have been difficult to resolve, probably
because the effects are transmitter- and synapse-specific.
The net effect of anesthetics on synaptic transmission is
determined by the relative magnitude and direction of both
their presynaptic and postsynaptic effects. The general
effects of inhaled anesthetics are to increase inhibitory syn-
aptic transmission and to inhibit excitatory synaptic trans-
mission (Fig. 19.9).
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	501
Excitatory synaptic excitation is generally decreased by
volatile anesthetics (Fig. 19.10). Experiments in various
slice preparations indicate that reduced excitation is pri-
marily caused by presynaptic mechanisms. 87,133,214,227-229
A postsynaptic mechanism is also involved because the
response to directly applied glutamate is reduced to some
degree.229-231 Volatile anesthetics have inconsistent effects
on cloned AMPA or NMDA glutamate receptors, but they
potentiate kainite receptors,115,129,232,233 consistent with a
predominantly presynaptic mechanism for glutamatergic
synapses. By contrast, the effects of the nonhalogenated
inhaled anesthetics (xenon, nitrous oxide, cyclopropane)
appear to be mediated primarily by inhibition of postsyn-
aptic NMDA receptors (discussed earlier). Under some
circumstances, such as in patients with defects in mito-
chondrial complex 1234 and in mice carrying mutations in
mitochondrial complex 1,235 inhaled agents suppress glu-
tamate release by interfering with the energy-intensive glu-
tamate recycling pathways,236 thereby leading to extreme
anesthetic sensitivity. Recent evidence from conditional
knockout mice indicates this mechanism may contribute to
various end points even in nonpathogenic states.237
Augmentation of GABAergic inhibition by most general
anesthetics is mediated by both presynaptic and postsynaptic
1 	2 	3 	4
Cl -
Cl-
Cl-
β
γ
β	α
α
A
C
B
Current
Time
GABA
release 	Postsynaptic
membrane
Ca2+
entry	Action potential
Inhibitory postsynaptic
current
+ Anesthetic
Channel
pore
Putative
anesthetic site
Intracellular
Critical
amino acids
Extracellular
Bicuculline, picrotoxin Inhibition of tonic current
Potentiation of tonic current
Baseline (Iholding )
Anesthetics, benzodiazepines
D
Isoflurane 2.5 μM 	Isoflurane 25 μM
Fig. 19.9 Synaptic and extrasynaptic γ-aminobutyric acid (GABAA ) receptors are targets for inhaled anesthetics. (A) On binding of GABA to the GABAA
receptor, its chloride-permeable channel opens, usually leading to hyperpolarization. Volatile anesthetics have a relatively low potency but high effi-
cacy at synaptic GABAA receptors and a high potency and low efficacy at extrasynaptic GABAA receptors. (B) General anesthetics prolong channel open-
ing and increase postsynaptic inhibition. The cartoon illustrates the prolongation of miniature inhibitory synaptic currents by the slowing of current
decay. (C) A pentameric GABAA receptor complex in the lipid bilayer membrane (left), with a blowup of a single subunit showing the location of residues
critical to anesthetic efficacy in the second and third transmembrane domains (right). (D) A tonic inhibitory conductance is revealed by the application
of a GABAA receptor antagonist (bicuculline or picrotoxin), as shown by the upward shift in the baseline current. Anesthetics and benzodiazepines
increase the tonic conductance, as indicated by the inward shift in the current. (Modified from Hemmings HC Jr, Akabas MH, Goldstein PA, et al. Emerging
molecular mechanisms of general anesthetic action. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2005;26:503–510.)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	502
mechanisms. Enhancement of postsynaptic and extrasyn-
aptic GABAA receptors is well recognized.116 Volatile anes-
thetics increase spontaneous GABA release and inhibitory
postsynaptic current (IPSC) frequency 238-242—that is, their
presynaptic effects at GABAergic terminals are distinct from
those at glutamatergic synapses.
The mechanisms for the presynaptic effects of inhaled
anesthetics, like those for their postsynaptic effects, are
complex and involve multiple targets. Although a syn-
apse-specific contribution of presynaptic Ca 2+ channels is
likely,243 presynaptic Na+ channels are more sensitive than
the Ca 2+ channels coupled to glutamate release. This find-
ing is consistent with observations that the predominant
Ca2+ channel coupled to neurotransmitter release at hip-
pocampal glutamatergic synapses (P/Q-type) is insensitive
to isoflurane.156 Other presynaptic mechanisms have been
proposed, including actions on the vesicle fusion process,
as demonstrated in the model organism Caenorhabditis ele-
gans.244,245 However, isoflurane effects on exocytosis in rat
hippocampal neurons occur primarily upstream of vesicle
fusion.139,246!
Simple Circuits and Complex
Networks
SIMPLE CIRCUIT PHENOMENA
The development of a mechanistic understanding of phe-
nomena involving complex circuits has been greatly
facilitated by the study of anatomically reduced (in vitro)
or physiologically simplified (in vivo) preparations com-
plemented by computer simulations (in silico). These
approaches are essential for integrating reductionist obser-
vations of the multiple molecular effects of anesthetics into
functional models relevant to behavioral end points. Anes-
thetic effects have been studied in acute brain slice prepa-
rations from various regions of the CNS (hippocampus,
amygdala, cortex, thalamus, brain stem, and spinal cord)—
most often from rodents. Brain slices preserve native con-
nections but usually lack natural inputs and outputs. Slices
from developing mammalian brain can also be cultured
in vitro. These “organotypic slice cultures” preserve a high
degree of synaptic connectivity and display spontaneous
network activity, typically absent from “acute slices.” Sim-
plified in vivo preparations involve phenomena (typically
evoked responses) with relatively well-understood circuitry.
Computer models and simulations can assist in generat-
ing hypotheses for experimental testing and developing
hypotheses based on experimental data.
Synaptic Plasticity
Paired-pulse depression and paired-pulse facilitation are
examples of short-term plasticity in response to external
stimulation. Synaptic inhibition is prolonged by volatile
anesthetics in vivo247 and in vitro,248 in general agreement
with the notion that anesthetics enhance functional inhi-
bition in the CNS. Enhancement of paired-pulse facilitation
has been attributed to the presynaptic depressant effect of
volatile agents (Fig. 19.11).133,228
LTP, a cellular model of learning and memory, is a use-
dependent strengthening of glutamatergic excitatory syn-
aptic connections. Volatile anesthetic effects on LTP depend
on the experimental preparation. Halothane, enflurane,
and isoflurane do not block LTP induction in vivo, whereas
ketamine and the NMDA antagonist CPP do.247,249 By
contrast, isoflurane blocks LTP in the hippocampal slice
by enhancing GABAA receptor–mediated inhibition (Fig.
19.12)250 or blocking neuronal nicotinic receptors,88 Long-
term depression, a use-dependent weakening of excitatory
connections that is effectively a homeostatic counterpart
of LTP, is also blocked by isoflurane in vitro.250 The dis-
crepancy between findings in vivo and in vitro remains
unexplained.!
Spontaneously Active Circuits
Spontaneous neuronal activity is decreased by volatile
anesthetics both in vivo and in cortical brain slices. This
effect is largely GABA A receptor-dependent and marked
even at low sedative concentrations.107 Because the cortical
brain slices lack subcortical input, these results suggest that
volatile anesthetics can cause some effects (e.g., sedation)
A 	B
Interneuron IPSC
Control
GABAA
Halothane
0.35 mM 	Overlay
200 pA
100 msec
100 pA
200 msec
100 pA
20 msec
Halothane
0.64 mM
Control
non-NMDA
Interneuron EPSC
NMDA
Fig. 19.10 Halogenated anesthetics enhance inhibitory and depress excitatory synaptic transmission. Halothane slows the decay of GABA A receptor–
mediated inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) (A) and depresses the amplitude of glutamatergic excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) without
affecting the decay (B) in hippocampal interneurons. ([A] Redrawn with permission from Nishikawa K, MacIver MB. Membrane and synaptic actions of
halothane on rat hippocampal pyramidal neurons and inhibitory interneurons. J Neurosci. 2000;20:5915–5923. [B] Redrawn with permission from Per-
ouansky M, Baranov D, Salman M, Yaari Y. Effects of halothane on glutamate receptor-mediated excitatory postsynaptic currents. A patch-clamp study
in adult mouse hippocampal slices. Anesthesiology. 1995;83:109–119.)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	503
via direct cortical action. However, changes in raw neuro-
nal firing rates do not provide a precise quantitative mea-
sure of higher cognitive function, which is better reflected
by the relationship of firing patterns to the strength and
phase of ongoing cortical rhythms (see next section). Anes-
thetic effects have also been tested on the circuitry under-
lying locomotion, a well-studied central pattern generator.
Effects of isoflurane on in vitro lamprey and rat spinal cord
preparations support the spinal cord as the primary target
for volatile anesthetic–induced immobility.251,252!
RHYTHMS AND SIMULATIONS
The brain perpetually generates complex electrical rhythms
(oscillations in extracellular field potentials) that range in
frequency from fractions to hundreds of Hertz (Hz; cycles
per second), as recorded on the surface of the scalp as the
electroencephalogram (EEG; the higher-frequency oscil-
lations cannot be resolved in surface recordings). All
oscillations are behavioral state–dependent and mul-
tiple oscillations coexist throughout the sleep-wake cycle.
Lower-frequency rhythms allow for integration over longer
time periods and typically engage larger areas of the brain.
By contrast, higher-frequency rhythms allow for higher
temporal resolution on local scales. Cross-frequency modu-
lation allows for integration of both aspects of information
processing. Although their physiologic roles are not clear,
brain rhythms reflect, subserve, and/or constitute funda-
mental higher-order processing such that their modulation
by anesthetics is of great interest. The current nomencla-
ture of brain rhythms reflects historical conventions and is
not based on underlying mechanisms.
δ-Rhythms and Other Slow Rhythms
Oscillations with EEG frequencies from 1.5 to 4 Hz are gen-
erally referred to as δ-rhythms, and these oscillations are
characteristic of deep sleep and are commonly observed
under general anesthesia. Even slower rhythms (below 1
Hz) occur during non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep
and appear at loss of consciousness induced by propofol 253
and sevoflurane. 254 During natural NREM sleep, δ-rhythms
and sleep spindles are phase related to a slower oscillation,
suggesting functional interaction.255 Paroxysmal spindle-
like waxing and waning oscillations overriding slower
rhythms are also present in the cortical EEG under anesthe-
sia. A change in δ-α phase relationships has been proposed
as a “signature” of propofol-induced unconsciousness,256
but how this comes about, whether similar changes occur
for a wider range of anesthetics, and the underlying physi-
ology and functional significance are unknown.!
θ-Rhythms
θ-Rhythms, present in various cortical structures but most
prominent in the hippocampus, are thought to signal the
“online state.” They are associated with sensorimotor and
5 mV
100 msec
Control
Halothane
Halothane
Pyramidal cell
Control
Interneuron
Fig. 19.11 Anesthetics affect excitation and inhibition simultaneously
in opposite directions. Halothane depresses the excitatory depolariza-
tion and augments the inhibitory hyperpolarization in both hippocam-
pal pyramidal cells and interneurons. The net result will depend on the
underlying neuronal state as well as the neuronal network and its func-
tion. (Redrawn with permission form Nishikawa K, MacIver MB. Membrane
and synaptic actions of halothane on rat hippocampal pyramidal neurons
and inhibitory interneurons. J Neurosci. 2000;20:5915–5923.)
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.2
2.4
2.0
-20 	-10 	0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	-20 	-10 	0 	10 	20 	30 	40
Normalized fEPSP slope
100Hz/1sec 	100Hz/1sec
Isoflurane 0.2–0.3 mM
Time (min)
Fig. 19.12 Isoflurane blocks the induction of synaptic plasticity in vitro (a model of learning and memory). Long-term potentiation (an increase in syn-
aptic strength), indicated by the increase in normalized excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) slope, in hippocampal slices evoked by tetanic stimula-
tion of excitatory synapses is blocked by 0.2 to 0.3 mM isoflurane. (Redrawn with permission from Simon W, Hapfelmeier G, Kochs E, et al. Isoflurane blocks
synaptic plasticity in the mouse hippocampus. Anesthesiology. 2001;94:1058–1065.)
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	504
mnemonic functions during waking behavior. 257 One com-
ponent of the θ-rhythm (type I or atropine-resistant) can be
affected by amnestic concentrations of isoflurane as well as
by the amnestic nonimmobilizer F6, 94 indicating a poten-
tial network-level signature effect for anesthetic-induced
amnesia. Type II θ-rhythm (atropine-sensitive) can be
evoked under anesthesia and is slowed and potentiated by
halothane.258 Interestingly, this halothane-induced oscilla-
tion disappears in TASK-3 knockout mice.46 !
γ-Rhythms
This designation includes an extremely broad and prob-
ably functionally and mechanistically heterogeneous
spectrum of rhythms. It is frequently subdivided into slow
γ (30-50 Hz; i.e., the spectrum above β-rhythms); γ (50-90
Hz), and fast-, ultra-γ, or ε-rhythms (>90 and up to hun-
dreds of Hz). Fast GABA A ergic synaptic inhibition and the
intrinsic resonant properties of neurons play important
roles in γ-physiology, making these obvious candidates
for anesthetic modulation. Isoflurane slows the frequency
of evoked γ-oscillations (30-90 Hz, also known as “40-
Hz rhythms”) in humans. 259,260 Studies of γ-oscillations
in vitro suggest that their frequency depends on the time
constant of decay of GABA A receptor–mediated synap-
tic currents in inhibitory networks. 261 Isoflurane slows
γ-rhythms in hippocampal 262 and neocortical slices 263
to a comparable degree as it does in humans, 259 provid-
ing a tentative link between receptor and circuit-level
effects. However, the interaction between anesthetics and
behaviorally relevant network effects is likely to be com-
plex because flash-evoked γ-oscillations in the primary
visual cortex are not affected by inhaled agents, 67 whereas
feedback information transfer at γ-frequencies between
the visual and frontal cortices is disrupted. 59,67 More-
over, many brain rhythms are interlinked (e.g., θ-rhythm
modulates γ-oscillations (θ−γ nesting). The nature of their
modulation by anesthetics as well as its relevance are far
from clear.!
Models and Simulations
On the macroscopic scale, computer simulations can pro-
vide an integrated picture of modulation of dynamic neuro-
nal and network activity. “Bottom-up” neuron-by-neuron
approaches are based on computational models of indi-
vidual neurons, known anesthetic effects on intrinsic and
synaptic membrane conductances, and simple network
models. Computer simulations of anesthetic effects on inte-
grated outputs can thereby be generated (e.g., the ring of
pacemaker neurons). 264 These models obviously rely on the
accuracy of the derived characteristics of real neurons and
networks as well as knowledge of the effects of anesthet-
ics; the scale of simulations is limited by the complexity of
its elements. 265 An alternative is a “top-down” approach,
such as mean-field modeling, in which molecular and cellu-
lar individual accuracy detail is sacrificed in favor of global
dynamics. For example, global cortical phenomena, such
as anesthetic-induced seizures, have been modeled as phase
transitions based on mean interactions between popula-
tions of averaged neurons (analogous to the EEG signal
that also averages the signals of neuronal populations).266
This approach can be extended to other global cortical phe-
nomena such as consciousness.267 Neuronal modeling and
computer simulations may gain importance in the future
as bridges between theoretical and experimental studies of
anesthesia.!
Research Strategies for the Future
The search for anesthetic mechanisms is driven by advances
in the basic sciences. Some strategies that should facilitate
understanding of anesthetic mechanisms include use of
agonists or antagonists in vivo, nonanesthetics or non-
immobilizers, high-resolution imaging of the functioning
brain, transgenic animals, and the application of the latest
techniques of molecular genetics.
PHARMACOLOGIC APPROACHES
Agonists, Antagonists, and Experimental
Anesthetics
Use of receptor-specific agonists and antagonists provides
a pharmacologic method for bridging in vitro with in vivo
studies. In this approach, a receptor may be tested for its
contribution to a specific end point (e.g., immobility) accord-
ing to the criteria presented earlier. This approach was used
to exclude an important role for NMDA receptor block in
the immobilizing action of volatile anesthetics but did not
yield conclusive results for the roles of GABA A and GlyR for
immobilization,267,268 probably owing to the intricacies of
drug-receptor interactions on different levels of integration
in complex networks like the spinal cord. A complementary
pharmacologic approach using experimental anesthetics
that inhibit NMDA receptors in vitro with different poten-
cies supports the conclusion that NMDA receptor blockade
does not contribute significantly to immobility by conven-
tional volatile anesthetics.269 Refinement of this strategy
involves the anatomically discrete application of drugs to
nuclei with known function. For example, the tuberomam-
millary nucleus (part of the endogenous sleep pathway)
mediates the sedative component of anesthesia for some
intravenous anesthetics (e.g., propofol). 35 A discrete site of
general anesthetic action for GABAergic drugs in the meso-
pontine tegmentum has also been proposed based on this
strategy.33,34 However, these approaches suffer from the
fact that, invariably, high concentrations of drugs have to
be injected locally to observe pharmacologic effects (because
of rapid redistribution), so that such observations need to be
substantiated using more sophisticated approaches, such as
genetic manipulations (see later).!
Nonimmobilizers
Nonimmobilizers are compounds with physicochemical
characteristics similar to those of conventional inhaled
anesthetics, but their predicted anesthetizing concentra-
tions (based on their lipid solubility and the Meyer-Overton
correlation [MACpred]) do not induce immobility.17 Initially
termed nonanesthetics, the terminology was revised when
it was discovered that at least some of them cause amne-
sia at similar MAC pred fractions to classic volatile anesthet-
ics.98 If a molecular or cellular process is affected in similar
ways by an anesthetic and a nonimmobilizer, that process
is not relevant for the anesthetic state, with the notable
exception of amnesia. Despite this elegant rationale, only
=== PAGE BREAK ===
19 • Inhaled Anesthetics: Mechanisms of Action 	505
a limited number of receptors have been excluded because,
compared with volatile anesthetics, nonimmobilizers are
relatively target selective. These compounds have the
potential to provide insights beyond the initially envisaged
receptor-level studies by allowing the separation of sedation
from amnesia for the study of underlying network activity
in vivo.95!
Photoreactive Anesthetics
An approach that has proven to be very successful with
intravenous drugs 270 is one in which an analog of an anes-
thetic is synthesized that bears a photoreactive group (often
a tri-fluoro-diazirine) which, when irradiated at a wave-
length of around 300 nm, reacts irreversibly with some
amino acids in the anesthetic binding site. This approach, of
course, requires that the pharmacologic profile of the ana-
log is very similar to that of the parent compound, so that
the relevant binding site is identified. Photoreactive analogs
of inhaled anesthetics have been synthesized and four puta-
tive sites on GABA A receptors have been identified. 271. One
advantage of this approach over x-ray crystallography is
that anesthetic binding to different conformational states
of the receptor are, at least in principle, more accessible to
analysis.!
GENETIC APPROACHES
Whole-Organism Genetics
Genetic strategies on whole organisms take two forms: for-
ward and reverse. 272 The reverse genetic approach focuses
on a particular gene chosen because there are reasons to
hypothesize that its product may be important to anesthe-
sia. Examples of this strategy are targeted mutations that
alter the sensitivity of specific neurotransmitter receptors
to anesthetics. 121 Initially, these mutations were used to
identify anesthetic binding sites. Subsequently, transgenic
animals rendered resistant to anesthetics, either by deletion
of a putative target protein from the genome or by express-
ing a target receptor engineered to be insensitive to an anes-
thetic, were used to test behavioral relevance of the altered
gene product for the production of anesthesia. Forward
genetics, by contrast, is a discovery process that involves
the study of randomly generated mutations (either experi-
mentally induced or naturally occurring polymorphisms)
that affect the phenotype of interest (i.e., anesthetic end
points) in a population. This approach, however, has not
been widely used.!
Molecular Genetics
A third genetic approach that is playing an increasing
role in neuroscience is the selective modification of neu-
ronal function using molecular genetics. Many different
approaches are used, ranging from the selective knock-
down of specific receptor populations using microRNA (a
small noncoding piece of RNA that can selectively reduce
protein expression), the block of neurotransmitter release
from a population of neurons using tetanus toxin light
chain, and the selective activation or inhibition of neuronal
networks using optogenetics273 or pharmacogenetics.274
A powerful complement to these techniques is the ability
to deliver artificial transgenes to defined neuronal popula-
tions using adeno-associated virus (AAV), and mouse lines
that express Cre recombinase in particular cell types, which
allow the selective expression of those genes in those spe-
cific cells. These approaches are only just beginning to be
used to identify neuronal pathways that are involved in
anesthetic action. For example, it has recently been shown
that the sedative effects of propofol require the activation of
the lateral habenula, an excitatory nucleus that lies close
to the thalamus.275 These approaches are likely to have an
increasing impact on our understanding of the mechanisms
of inhaled general anesthetics.!
Knockout and Knockin Animals
In the knockout approach, expression of the gene encod-
ing a protein of interest is disrupted by a specific deletion
or insertion. Nearly all such studies have been carried out
in mice. A well-recognized problem with the global knock-
out approach is that extensive compensatory changes
can be induced, from anomalies that are lethal in utero
to insidious (but experimentally confounding) influences
that might be expressed only at maturity. A complemen-
tary strategy is the conditional knockout, in which the
genetic deletion is restricted either anatomically (limited
to certain brain regions) or temporally (at a known point
in time). These strategies can minimize developmental
anomalies and reduce the likelihood of compensatory
changes. In the knockin approach, a mutation, usually of
a single amino acid residue, is targeted to produce a pro-
tein with altered sensitivity to a drug of interest. Ideally,
this mutation remains completely silent in the absence of
the drug; that is, it does not perturb the normal expression
and function of the protein of interest or alter the expres-
sion of other genes.
GABAA 	receptors. Results from transgenic animals
illustrate both the utility and the difficulties of the genetic
approach with respect to inhaled agents. The conditional
forebrain-restricted GABAA receptor α1-subunit knockout
mouse was found to be less sensitive to isoflurane-induced
amnesia than wild-type mice, which led to the conclu-
sion that action at these receptors contributes to isoflu-
rane’s amnesic effects.276 By contrast, a mouse harboring
a mutation of the GABA A receptor α1 subunit that renders
the receptor insensitive to isoflurane in vitro did not show
reduced sensitivity to either the amnesic or the immobiliz-
ing effects of isoflurane, leading to the conclusion that this
subunit does not mediate the impairment of learning and
memory by isoflurane.40 Similar experiments indicate that
action at the GABAA receptor β 3 subunit does not medi-
ate immobility or amnesia by isoflurane.39 This bottom-up
genetic approach is a work-intensive but powerful tool that
has yielded clear results with the receptor-specific intrave-
nous anesthetics,27 but it has proved challenging to apply it
to the more promiscuous inhaled agents.!
Glycine α1–containing receptors. Pharmacologic stud-
ies supported the notion that glycinergic neurotransmission
might be the effector for the immobilizing action of inhaled
anesthetics in the spinal cord, where glycine replaces GABA
as the principal inhibitory transmitter. However, mice har-
boring mutations that render α1 subunit–containing gly-
cine receptors largely insensitive to alcohol and inhaled
ether anesthetics did not demonstrate a concordant change
=== PAGE BREAK ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	506
in MAC values. Because α1 is the most widely expressed
subunit in adult animals, it is unlikely that action at gly-
cine receptors plays an important part in the immobilizing
action of inhaled anesthetics.276 !
Two-pore domain K + channels. Use of mice harboring
knockout mutations of several two-pore domain K+ chan-
nel (K2P) family members (TASK-1, TASK-3, TREK-1) has
demonstrated a role for these channels in volatile anes-
thesia.44,45,47 For example, TREK-1 knockout mice are
partially resistant to all volatile anesthetics tested with
respect to both loss of righting reflex (a surrogate measure
of consciousness) and immobility, but anesthesia can still
be induced, albeit at higher anesthetic concentrations.
Interestingly, responses to pentobarbital are unaffected,
indicating that the mutation does not cause a generalized
resistance to anesthesia.!
FORWARD AND POPULATION GENETICS
The nematode C. elegans and the fruit fly Drosophila mela-
nogaster, with 302 and 100,000 neurons, respectively,
have also been used as model organisms in anesthesia
research.277 Mutations in a number of C. elegans genes affect
sensitivity to volatile anesthetics, 278 most notably unc-1,279
a close homologue of the mammalian protein stomatin.280
Yeasts have also been used as model organisms, with even
more obvious limitations with respect to identification of
appropriate anesthetic end points.
Sensitivity to anesthetics is a quantitative trait (vary-
ing continuously in a population). Quantitative genetics
is the study of the heritability of continuous traits. These
traits are controlled by genes represented in quantitative
trait loci (QTLs). A top-down population-based approach
has been used to localize QTLs that govern susceptibility of
individuals to anesthetics, in higher and lower organisms.
Starting from the observation that inbred mouse strains
vary in their sensitivity to isoflurane, microsatellite-based
linkage analysis and, alternatively, single-nucleotide poly-
morphism–based analysis of genetic variation localized a
QTL for isoflurane immobilization to the proximal part of
mouse chromosome 7.281 Genetic variability in the sensi-
tivity of D. melanogaster to inhaled anesthetics has also been
demonstrated.282 This type of analysis promises to assist in
defining the genetic basis for variability in the susceptibility
to both primary anesthetic end points and side effects.!
FUNCTIONAL IMAGING AND HIGH-DENSITY
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY
Identification of the anatomic and functional substrates for
anesthetic effects on consciousness, memory, and immo-
bility is now approachable with improved imaging tech-
niques. Imaging is based on mapping of either metabolic
or hemodynamic changes as surrogate measures of neu-
ronal activity, as in positron emission tomography (PET)
and functional magnetic resonance imaging, or on map-
ping electrical activity with high-density EEG, magnetoen-
cephalography, and low-resolution brain electromagnetic
tomography. Properties of receptors can also be probed
with radioactive ligands by PET. These techniques have
the capacity to identify neuroanatomic substrates of drug
action with method-specific limitations. Results from func-
tional PET imaging suggest that propofol suppresses episodic
memory by targeting the prefrontal and posterior parietal
cortex as opposed to the medial temporal lobe283 and that
suppression of consciousness is caused by anesthetic action
in the thalamus, parts of the medial and posterior parietal
cortex, and/or the posterior cingulate and medial parietal
cortex.284 Although observations of regionally specific and
global suppressive effects of anesthetics on metabolic activ-
ity are unlikely to provide a definitive mechanistic under-
standing, such information can facilitate hypotheses and
experimentally testable predictions.
Advanced analytical approaches based on theories from
mathematical and statistical sciences are being increas-
ingly applied to enhance the power of existing technologies.
Magnetic resonance images and high-density EEG record-
ings of the brain reveal strong interregional connections,
but the considerable potential of this connectivity informa-
tion to better understand the brain’s response to anesthesia
has only recently begun to be tapped. The growing use of
invasive recording techniques (e.g., brain surface electrode
grids and microelectrodes implanted deep into the brain for
functional neurosurgical therapies) is also advancing the
frontiers of neuroscience in general and the understanding
of anesthetic mechanisms in particular.!
Summary
The mechanisms of inhaled anesthetics have proved
more difficult to explain than was envisaged a generation
ago, when the paradigm shifted from lipids to amphiphi-
lic cavities in proteins as targets for anesthetics. Despite a
remarkable accumulation of information, a comprehen-
sive theory of general anesthetic action has yet to be for-
mulated. Progress toward this goal has been difficult for
several reasons. Important pharmacologic characteristics
of inhaled anesthetics that have impeded identification
of their relevant molecular targets are their low potency
(micromolar range), activity at multiple targets, lack of
specific antagonists, and limitations in the neuroscience
of memory and consciousness. This contrasts with the
situation for intravenous anesthetics, which exhibit more
conventional receptor pharmacology. Moreover, accumu-
lating evidence indicates that no universal target exists to
explain the actions of every general anesthetic or even of a
single anesthetic agent. It is now clear that the composite
state of anesthesia and its core components (amnesia, seda-
tion/unconsciousness, immobility) are separable behav-
ioral states in vivo. Resolution of these phenomena at the
molecular and cellular levels represents the cutting edge
of contemporary neuroscience. Of the multiple molecular
and cellular anesthetic effects identified, it is unclear which
are critical for the desired behavioral end points, which
are harmless or beneficial side effects (e.g., precondition-
ing), and which, if any, could have long-lasting or delayed
undesirable consequences (e.g., cell death, cognitive dys-
function). Progress in identifying the molecular targets of
general anesthetics provides a foundation for identification
of the network- and systems-level effects relevant to their
behavioral and peripheral end points. As the biologic foun-
dations of behaviors once thought to be exclusively the