=== SECTION 1: General ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	404
From outermost to innermost these layers are the serosa,
longitudinal muscle layer, circular muscle layer, sub-
mucosa, and mucosa. Within the mucosa is (outermost
to innermost) the muscularis mucosae, lamina propria,
and epithelium. The serosa is a smooth membrane of thin
connective tissue and cells that secrete serous fluid that
serves to enclose the cavity and reduce friction between
muscle movements. The longitudinal muscle layer con-
tracts in order to shorten the length of the intestinal
segment whereas the circular muscle layer contracts to
decrease the diameter of the intestinal lumen. These two
layers work together to allow for gut motility. Between
these smooth muscle layers is the myenteric (Auerbach)
plexus, which regulates the gut smooth muscle. The
submucosa contains the submucosal (Meissner) plexus,
which transmits information from the epithelium to the
enteric and central nervous systems (CNS). The mucosa
is composed of a thin layer of smooth muscle called the
muscularis mucosa, which functions to move the villi; the
lamina propria, which contains blood vessels, nerve end-
ings, and immune and inflammatory cells; and the epithe-
lium, which is where the GI contents are sensed and where
secretion of enzymes, absorption of nutrients, and excre-
tion of waste products occur.
The GI tract is innervated by the autonomic nervous
system. This is composed of the extrinsic nervous system,
which has sympathetic and parasympathetic components,
and the enteric nervous system. The extrinsic sympathetic
nervous system is primarily inhibitory as stimulation can
decrease or cease GI motility. The preganglionic fibers
originate at the T5 to L2 segments of the spinal cord. They
travel to the sympathetic chain of ganglia and synapse with
postganglionic neurons. Then they travel to the gut where
they terminate at the enteric nervous system. The primary
neurotransmitter is norepinephrine. Vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide (VIP) also transmits sympathetic signals. The
extrinsic parasympathetic nervous system is primarily
excitatory as it activates GI motility and function. Parasym-
pathetic preganglionic fibers originate in the medulla and
sacral region of the spinal cord. Vagus nerve fibers inner-
vate the esophagus, stomach, pancreas, small intestine,
and the first half of the large intestine. Pelvic nerve fibers
innervate the second half of the large intestine, sigmoid,
rectal, and anal regions. The primary neurotransmitter is
acetylcholine.
The enteric nervous system is the independent nervous
system of the GI tract, which controls motility, secre-
tion, and blood flow. Two plexuses constitute the enteric
nervous system: the myenteric (Auerbach) plexus and
the submucosal (Meissner) plexus. The myenteric plexus
controls motility, which is carried out by enteric neurons,
interstitial cells of Cajal (pacemaker cells that generate
intrinsic electrical activity of the GI tract), and smooth
muscle cells. The submucosal plexus controls absorption,
secretion, and mucosal blood flow. Both of these plexuses
respond to sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulation.
Sympathetic stimulation is inhibitory so it will increase
the tone of the intestinal wall whereas parasympathetic
stimulation is excitatory and will induce intestinal con-
tractions and movement. Additionally, there are a vari-
ety of reflexes in the enteric nervous system. For example,
when there is sympathetic stimulation the tone of the wall
increases, the sphincters contract, and, reflexively, the
amount of excitatory acetylcholine released is reduced.
The mechanism is via α-2 activation, which inhibits the
release of acetylcholine and through β activation which
contracts sphincter muscles and relaxes intestinal mus-
cles. These two actions work together to slow the transit of
contents through the GI tract.
This next section serves to briefly discuss the anatomy
and function of the various components of the GI tract. Only
the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and large intestine
are covered. See Table 15.1 for an overview of GI tract anat-
omy and function.
The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the
pharynx to the stomach. It is the first passageway for
food entry into the digestive system. It is approximately
18 to 25 cm in length and extends from the level of the
hypopharynx at the C6 vertebrae down to the gastro-
esophageal (GE) junction at the T11 level. 1 The esopha-
gus has three regions: cervical, thoracic, and abdominal.
The cervical esophagus is approximately 4 to 5 cm long
and is surrounded by the trachea anteriorly, the verte-
bral column posteriorly, and the carotid sheaths and
thyroid gland laterally. The thoracic esophagus spans
from the suprasternal notch to the diaphragmatic hia-
tus and lies posterior to the trachea. At the level of the
carina, it deviates right to allow room for the aortic arch
and runs posteriorly and underneath the left mainstem
bronchus. From T8 to the diaphragmatic hiatus (T10)
the esophagus runs anterior to the aorta. The abdomi-
nal esophagus extends from the diaphragmatic hiatus
to the cardia of the stomach. The upper one-third of
the esophagus is composed of striated muscle and the
remaining two-thirds is smooth muscle. There are two
areas of high pressure: the upper esophageal sphincter
(UES) and the lower esophageal sphincter (LES). The UES
lies at the level of the cricoid cartilage and is made up
of the cricopharyngeal, inferior constrictor, and circular
esophageal muscles. Resting tone ranges from 30–200
mm Hg. Opening and closing of the UES is coordinated
with the pharyngeal pushing of food downstream. The
LES is formed intrinsically by circular esophageal muscle
and extrinsically by the diaphragm muscle. It has both
sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation. Resting
tone is 10–45 mm Hg. 2
The stomach is a J-shaped dilation of the alimentary
tract. It is divided into four regions: the cardia, fundus,
body or corpus, and antrum. The stomach has three
main functions: store large quantities of food (up to 1.5–2
liters), mix food with gastric secretions to form chyme
and break down particle size, and slow emptying into the
small intestine. The proximal stomach is the reservoir
for undigested food and produces smooth, tonic contrac-
tions. The distal stomach grinds, mixes, and sieves food
particles via high-amplitude contractions. Notable cell
types in the stomach that aid in digestion are the mucous
cells, which protect against harsh hydrochloric acid;
parietal cells, which secrete hydrochloric acid; chief cells,
which secrete pepsin; and G cells, which secrete gastrin.
Together these cells’ secretions break down and partially
digest the food into chyme as well as reduce particle
dimension to an appropriate size (2 mm or less) before it
enters the small intestine. 2

=== SECTION 2: General ===
15 • Gastrointestinal Physiology and Pathophysiology 	405
The duodenum is the first and smallest section of the
small intestine. It is between 25 and 30 cm long and it forms
a C-shaped loop around the pancreas. Its main function is
to chemically digest the chyme received from the stomach
in preparation for absorption. The pancreas, liver, and gall-
bladder secrete digestive enzymes through the ampulla of
Vater into the middle portion of the duodenum.2
The jejunum is the second section of the small intestine
and its primary function is to absorb nutrients. The digested
chyme from the duodenum enters the jejunum where it is
mixed and circulated for exposure to the jejunal walls for
nutrient absorption. The walls of the jejunum are folded
many times over to increase its surface area and allow
for maximal absorption of nutrients. By the time chyme
enters the ileum, almost 90% of all available nutrients are
absorbed.2
The ileum is the final section of the small intestine. It
serves to absorb vitamin B12 and other products of diges-
tion that were not previously absorbed in the jejunum. It
ends at the ileocecal valve—a circular muscle that serves to
prevent reflux of colonic contents into the small intestine.
It contracts in response to colonic dilation and relaxes in
response to ileal dilation.2
The large intestine is composed of the cecum, appen-
dix, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending
colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum. Briefly, the cecum
is a pouch at the beginning of the large intestine that
allows for mixing of the chyme from the small intestine
with bacteria to form fecal matter. The ascending colon
transports the fecal matter superiorly along the right side
up to the transverse colon. Along the way the ascending
colonic wall absorbs water, nutrients, and vitamins. The
transverse colon, the longest portion of the large intes-
tine, crosses the abdominal cavity. Its contractions serve
to mix the feces and allow bacteria to ferment the waste.
Further absorption of water and nutrients also take
place. The feces then enter the descending colon, which
stores the feces until it is ready for transport, inferiorly
and along the left side of the abdominal cavity to the
sigmoid colon. Again, the walls of the descending colon
allow for further absorption of water and nutrients. The
sigmoid colon is an S-shaped, curved region that stores
then transports fecal matter from the descending colon
to the rectum and anus for elimination. The final por-
tion of the large intestine is the rectum where feces are
stored until elimination. As fecal matter accumulates it
exerts pressure on the walls of the rectum. This activates
stretch receptors and leads to relaxation of the internal
anal sphincter allowing for elimination. 2 !
Transit Time in Health and
Disease
This section serves to discuss motility in the esophagus,
stomach, small intestine, and large intestine. Emphasis is
placed on mechanism, how motility and transit are altered
by various disease states, and methods for evaluating
motility.
Mixing movements and propulsive movements are the
two primary movements within and along the GI tract.
Mixing movements keep the contents of the intestine appro-
priately and thoroughly mixed throughout, while the pro-
pulsive movements, consisting of periodic contractions of
certain GI tract segments (peristalsis), move the contents of
the intestine along the tract.
Transit through the esophagus starts with swallowing.
Swallowing starts with the oropharynx pushing food back-
ward and downward while the muscles of the nasopharynx
prevent food from entering the nasal passages. When ready
TABLE 15.1 	Table of Gastrointestinal Components, Locations, and Functions
Component 	Location 	Function
Esophagus 	Extends from C6 to T11 	Propels food from the pharynx to the stomach
Stomach 	Left upper abdominal cavity. Diaphragm along the top,
pancreas posteriorly, greater omentum laterally
Receives food from the esophagus and initiates digestion.
Breaks down food into chyme through physical and chemi-
cal mechanisms
Duodenum 	Inferior to stomach, approximately 25–30 cm long 	Chemically digests chyme for absorption in the small intestine
Jejunum 	Between duodenum and ileum 	Absorption of nutrients from chyme
Ileum 	Between jejunum and cecum 	Further nutrient absorption
Cecum 	Lower right quadrant of abdominal cavity, inferior and
lateral to the ileum
A space for mixing of chyme with bacteria to form fecal matter
Ascending colon 	Runs superiorly from the cecum to the right inferior
border of the liver where it turns 90 degrees to become
the transverse colon
Peristaltic waves move the feces superiorly where bacteria
digest the waste and further nutrients, water, and vitamins
are absorbed
Transverse colon 	Crosses abdominal cavity right to left just below the
stomach
Fecal formation
Descending colon 	Runs inferiorly along the left side of the abdominal cavity 	Stores fecal matter prior to elimination. Further absorbs water,
nutrients, vitamins
Sigmoid colon 	Lower left quadrant of the abdominal cavity 	Stores fecal matter prior to elimination
Rectum 	Posterior pelvic cavity. Along the anterior surface of the
sacrum and coccyx
Stores fecal matter prior to elimination. Distention will activate
stretch receptors allowing the internal anal sphincter to relax
and allow for defecation.

=== SECTION 3: General ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	406
to be swallowed the food is squeezed and rolled into the pos-
terior pharynx by the tongue. The epiglottis moves upward
in a protective mechanism over the larynx and trachea to
prevent aspiration. The act of swallowing inhibits the respi-
ratory center to protect from aspiration but it is so short-
lived it is unnoticeable. Food enters the esophagus through
the UES, which then constricts to prevent reflux back into
the pharynx. The UES produces pressures around 30–200
mm Hg. Two waves of peristalsis move the food into the
stomach through the LES, which also produces pressures
between 20 and 60 mm Hg. Afferent nerve fibers transmit
to the dorsal vagal complex activating efferent fibers that
terminate either on the striated muscle of the esophagus or
on the nerves of the enteric nervous system. Release of ace-
tylcholine contracts the muscle while VIP and nitric oxide
(NO) relax it. The LES responds to esophageal distention via
myogenic and neurohormonal mechanisms.
Diseases of the esophagus are varied. Etiologies can be
grouped into anatomical, mechanical, and neurologic,
although many disease states involve overlap between two
or all three. Anatomical etiologies include the presence of
diverticula, hiatal hernia, and changes associated with
chronic acid reflux. These anatomical abnormalities inter-
rupt the normal pathway of food as it travels to the stom-
ach which, in turn, changes many of the pressure zones of
the esophagus. This can have dangerous sequelae as the
luminal pressures may increase enough to overcome the
resting pressures of the UES and LES allowing for reflux.
Mechanical etiologies include achalasia, diffuse esophageal
spasm, and hypertensive LES. There is also a neurologic
component to these diseases but the result is the same—
the esophagus is unable to relax properly for food travel. In
achalasia the smooth muscles are unable to relax and move
food down and the increased tone of the LES does not allow
for complete relaxation. This results in dysphagia, regur-
gitation, and significant pain. In diffuse esophageal spasm
the muscle contractions are uncoordinated and, as a result,
food does not properly move downward. A hypertensive
LES is defined as an LES with a mean pressure of 45 mm Hg
or higher leading to dysphagia and chest pain. Neurologic
disorders such as stroke, vagotomy, or hormone deficien-
cies will alter the nerve pathways such that the appropri-
ate sensing and feedback are disrupted. A common result of
neurologic disorders in the esophagus is dysphagia.
In evaluating esophageal function, it is important to
select a study with an appropriate clinical correlation—is it
a problem with motility or is it an anatomical abnormality?
If it is a questionable motility problem, then an esophageal
manometry study is best. A special catheter detects changes
in pressure in the esophagus at various levels. First the pres-
sure of the LES is recorded. The catheter is then pulled back
into the esophagus and pressure measurements are made at
different levels. Esophageal motor function between swal-
lows is also evaluated. Finally the motor function of the UES
is recorded and then the catheter is pulled out. Question-
able anatomical problems are best studied using an upper
GI series and ingested barium. These evaluate the act of
swallowing and visualize the lining of the esophagus for
anatomic abnormalities.
Before discussing the transit of food through the stom-
ach and small intestine it is important to understand their
actions during the fasting state. The migrating motor
complex (MMC) occurs only during fasting, and is com-
posed of waves of electrical activity in regular cycles origi-
nating in the stomach and terminating in the distal ileum.3
Vagal stimulation releases motilin, which triggers an MMC
leading to peristaltic waves. They occur every 45 to 180
minutes and are composed of four phases. Phase I is a period
of quiescence. Phase II is composed of increased action
potentials and low-amplitude smooth muscle contractility.
Phase III is the most active as it is the time of peak electrical
and mechanical activity producing bursts of regular, high-
amplitude contractions. Phase IV demonstrates declining
activity and will merge into the following MMC’s phase
I. The MMC is significant because it moves residual undi-
gested food through the GI tract and also moves bacteria
from the small intestine to the large intestine. Feeding inter-
rupts it, and this is discussed next.
As described previously, the stomach is a J-shaped sac
that serves as a reservoir for large volumes of food, mixes
and breaks down food to form chyme, and slows emptying
into the small intestine. Solids must be broken down into 1
to 2 mm particles before entering the duodenum, and they
take approximately 3 to 4 hours to empty from the stomach.
Liquids empty faster than solids. The motility of the stomach
is controlled by intrinsic and extrinsic neural regulation.
Parasympathetic stimulation to the vagus nerve increases
the number and force of contractions whereas sympathetic
stimulation inhibits these contractions via the splanchnic
nerve. The intrinsic nervous system provides the coordi-
nation for motility. Neurohormonal control is also at play
in that gastrin and motilin will increase the strength and
frequency of contractions and the gastric inhibitory peptide
will inhibit them.
Emptying of the stomach is controlled by neural and hor-
monal mechanisms as well as the composition of ingested
food. Gastric distention, gastrin, and NO will promote emp-
tying. Duodenal distention decreases the gastric tone to slow
emptying, and increased fat content triggers the release of
cholecystokinin to further inhibit stomach motility.
Gastric motility disorders that slow its emptying can
increase the incidence of GE reflux disease. These disorders
can be drug-induced, neurologic, or a result of critical ill-
ness. Drug-induced conditions include the administration
of opioids (to be discussed later in the chapter), and the
use of vasoactive agents. Vasoactive drugs increase cat-
echolamine concentrations leading to sympathetic stimu-
lation and, therefore, decreased motility. These drugs are
often given intraoperatively or to critically ill patients for
blood pressure control. Neurologic disorders resulting
in decreased gastric motility include vagal neuropathies
and gastroparesis. Finally, conditions that are commonly
present in severely compromised patients, such as those
with hyperglycemia, increased intracranial pressure, and
mechanical ventilation can decrease gastric motility. Efforts
to increase motility using drugs like erythromycin and
metoclopramide have been used with some success.
The most prevailing test to evaluate gastric motility is the
gastric emptying study. The patient fasts for at least 4 hours
prior to the study then consumes a meal with a tightly
bound radiotracer, commonly egg albumin. Continuous
or frequent imaging occurs for the next 60 to 120 minutes
and the measurement of time for 50% of the ingested meal
to empty is determined. It is important to note that while

=== SECTION 4: General ===
15 • Gastrointestinal Physiology and Pathophysiology 	407
gastric emptying scintigraphy has long been the standard
study, it is affected by multiple factors including meal com-
position and data acquisition parameters. 4 Gastric motil-
ity studies can also be paired with small intestinal motility
studies such as the small bowel manometry test. This will
be discussed later.
Small intestinal motility mixes the contents of the stom-
ach with digestive enzymes, further reducing particle size
and increasing solubility. However, the major function of
the small intestine is to circulate the contents and expose
them to the mucosal wall in order to maximize absorption
of water, nutrients, and vitamins before entering the large
intestine. Again, there are mixing contractions and propul-
sive contractions. The circular and longitudinal muscle lay-
ers work in a coordinated fashion to achieve segmentation.
Segmentation occurs when two nearby areas contract and
thereby isolate a segment of intestine. Then a contraction
occurs in the middle of that isolated segment, further divid-
ing it. Contractions in the middle of those segments con-
tinue to occur and the process ensues. Segmentation allows
the contents to remain in the intestine long enough for the
essential substances to be absorbed into the circulation. It is
controlled mainly by the enteric nervous system with mod-
ulation of motility by the extrinsic nervous system.
When considering small bowel dysmotility it is helpful
to distinguish etiologies based on reversible and nonrevers-
ible causes. For reversible causes, mechanical obstruction
should be the first to come to mind. In this case, there is a
physical obstruction the muscles of the intestine cannot
overcome. Hernias, malignancy, adhesions, and volvuluses
are all examples. Bacterial overgrowth should be another
consideration. Although the large intestine is rich with bac-
teria, the small intestine usually has fewer than 100,000
organisms per milliliter. Disrupting this condition with bac-
terial overgrowth leads to alterations in absorptive func-
tion leading to diarrhea. It is treated with antibiotics. Other
reversible causes include ileus, electrolyte abnormalities,
and critical illness. Nonreversible causes can be classified
as structural or neuropathic. In structural causes there
may be abnormalities with the intestinal smooth muscle, in
which it cannot produce proper contractions. This occurs
in diseases such as scleroderma and connective tissue disor-
ders. In patients with an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),
there is a structural abnormality in the mucosa leading to
decreased absorption of nutrients. Short bowel syndrome
can be considered a structural etiology in that a large por-
tion of the small intestinal structure is simply not present.
In patients who have had a section of their small bowel
resected, the remaining portion may not provide sufficient
functional compensation, resulting in diarrhea, malnutri-
tion, and weight loss. Neuropathic etiologies can produce
a pseudo-obstruction in which the intrinsic and extrinsic
nervous systems are altered in such a way that the intes-
tines can only produce weak or uncoordinated contrac-
tions. This leads to symptoms of bloating, nausea, vomiting,
and abdominal pain. Regardless of etiology, small intestinal
dysmotility adversely affects nutrient absorption leading to
malnutrition.
The most common test used to evaluate small intestine
motility is small bowel manometry. This test is useful in
patients with unexplained nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain, and manifested signs of obstruction without a clear
obstructive cause. Similar to esophageal manometry, this
test uses a small catheter with pressure sensors to evalu-
ate the contractions of the intestine. The study evaluates
contractions during three periods: fasting, during a meal,
and postprandial. Normally the recording time is four hours
for fasting, followed by ingestion of a meal, and two hours
postprandial. Abnormal results are grouped into myopathic
and neuropathic causes. In myopathic results, the MMC is
absent or phase III exhibits very low amplitudes (normal
phase III amplitude is 40 mm Hg). In neuropathic results,
the contraction amplitude is adequate but either the con-
tractions are uncoordinated (enteric neuropathy) or there
is an inappropriate postprandial response, meaning post-
prandial antral hypomotility is present (extrinsic neuropa-
thy). This manometry test is reported to result in a change
of diagnosis in 8% to 15% of patients with unexplained nau-
sea, vomiting, and abdominal pain.5
The large intestine acts as a reservoir for waste and
indigestible material before elimination and extracts any
remaining electrolytes and water. It plays an essential role
in regulating defecation and consistency of stools. Dis-
tention of the ileum will relax the ileocecal valve to allow
intestinal contents to enter the colon and subsequent cecal
distention will contract it. The contractions of the colon are
different from the rest of the gut. While there are still mix-
ing and propulsive movements by the circular and longi-
tudinal muscles, respectively, the colon also exhibits giant
migrating complexes. The giant migrating complexes serve
to produce mass movements across the large intestine. In
the healthy state, these complexes occur approximately 6
to 10 times within 24 hours with mean amplitude of 115
mm Hg at a distance of about 1 cm/s for approximately 20
seconds each.6 These complexes, as well as the mixing and
propulsive movements, serve to transfer contents to the
rectum. The giant migrating complexes that originate in
the sigmoid colon will produce the urge to defecate. Rectal
distention as well as VIP and NO release will promote relax-
ation of the internal anal sphincter and allow for defecation.
Colonic dysmotility manifests with two primary symp-
toms: altered bowel habits and intermittent abdominal
cramping. The most common diseases associated with
colonic dysmotility are irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and
IBD, both of which are clinical diagnoses. Rome II crite-
ria define IBS as having abdominal pain/discomfort along
with at least two of the following three features: defecation
relieves pain or discomfort, onset of pain is associated with
an abnormal frequency of stools (more than three times
per day or fewer than three times per week), and onset of
pain is associated with a change in the form of the stool.7
In IBS with predominantly diarrheal symptoms, there is an
increase in the frequency and amplitude of spontaneous
giant migrating complexes, and this increase is directly pro-
portional to the severity of symptoms. In IBS with predomi-
nantly constipation, there is a decreased amplitude and
frequency of giant migrating complexes. In severe cases the
giant migrating complexes may be completely absent. In
addition, there is a depression of overall contractile activity
in the colon leading to colonic distention and the sensation
of pain. This phenomenon is exacerbated by stress in which
there is significant motor dysfunction and visceral hyper-
sensitivity as well as an increase in plasma norepineph-
rine stimulating the sympathetic nervous system. In IBD

=== SECTION 5: General ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	408
the mixing and propulsive movements as well as the tonic
contractions are suppressed due to colonic wall compres-
sion by the inflamed mucosa, but the giant migrating com-
plexes remain. There is an increased frequency of the giant
migrating complexes and their large pressure effect further
compresses the inflamed mucosa, which can lead to hemor-
rhage, thick mucus secretion, and significant erosions.!
Methods of Evaluating Colonic
Motility
Studies evaluating giant migrating complexes in patients
with IBS and IBD are not routine but are performed only on
patients with known diagnoses to help understand the phys-
iology and mechanism causing them. There are, however,
tests to evaluate the function and anatomy of the large intes-
tine. The lower GI series, for example, involves the adminis-
tration of a barium enema to a patient. The barium outlines
the intestine and it is visible on radiograph. This allows for
detection of colon and rectal anatomical abnormalities.!
The Effects of General Anesthesia
on Bowel Function
GI effects of the anesthetics are multifaceted and encompass
a wide array of hemodynamic and physiological changes.
This section is broken down into the various components
that make up a general anesthetic and the GI effects of each
of these components. Emphasis is placed on the effects of
preoperative sedation, induction of anesthesia, hypnotic
agents, volatile agents, paralysis, and reversal. Opioids will
be discussed in another section. Please note that this discus-
sion applies to the healthy state.
In the preoperative setting patients are often nervous and
sympathetic stimulation is high. Inhibition of GI tract activ-
ity is directly proportional to the amount of norepinephrine
secreted from sympathetic stimulation, so the higher the
anxiety the higher the inhibition. Even though a good bed-
side manner and the use of behavioral approaches are benefi-
cial, these may not be sufficient and patients are often given
premedication with a benzodiazepine, usually midazolam,
to alleviate anxiety. Midazolam acts by enhancing the effect
of neurotransmitter, GABA, on GABA-A receptors. A study
by Castedal and associates looked at the effect of midazolam
on small bowel motility using antroduodenojejunal manom-
etry.8 The vast majority of the studied variables were not
affected by the use of midazolam, but one significant change
was noted—an increased duration of phase III of the MMC in
the proximal and distal parts of the duodenum, which short-
ened the MMC by 27%. A clear explanation for this is not
evident but there are a couple of considerations. One, the sed-
ative effect of midazolam may be the reason for the change in
MMC activity because MMC activity differs between awake
and sleep states. Another consideration is that the resultant
reduced anxiety decreases sympathetic stimulation allowing
for less inhibition and higher activity. However, when applied
clinically, there was no real difference seen in small intestinal
motility patterns. Of the premedications, midazolam is widely
used and considered well tolerated.
General anesthesia causes a loss of all protective reflexes.
This is achieved with a variety of medications including
opioids, hypnotics, and neuromuscular blocking agents. As
mentioned, the effect of opioids will be discussed in a later
section. Volatile anesthetics affect bowel function through
various mechanisms including depression of spontane-
ous activity and changes in intestinal tissue oxygenation.
Volatile anesthetics depress the spontaneous, electrical,
contractile, and propulsive activity in the stomach, small
intestine, and colon as demonstrated in many animal and
human studies. The small intestine is the first part of the
GI tract to recover, followed by the stomach in approxi-
mately 24 hours and then the colon 30 to 40 hours post-
operatively. Between the various volatile anesthetics there
are minor differences. One difference worth noting is that
rapid increases in the concentration of desflurane induces
greater sympathetic activation, as compared to other vola-
tile agents, which coupled with sympathetic nervous sys-
tem hyperactivity during surgical procedures can inhibit
GI function and motility. In a study comparing desflurane
and isoflurane, rapid increases in desflurane caused signifi-
cantly greater effects on sympathetic and renin-angiotensin
system activity as well as increases in blood pressure and
heart rate as compared to isoflurane. However, this effect
is short-lived as it is only seen with rapid increases in con-
centration and the surge in sympathetic stimulation tapers
off quickly. This transient phenomenon is unlikely to have
a lasting effect on bowel function. 9 The volatile anesthet-
ics also affect splanchnic circulation and oxygenation in a
dose-dependent manner, which is known to have an effect
on bowel function. In horses receiving isoflurane for main-
tenance of anesthesia, microperfusion and intestinal tissue
oxygenation decreased when isoflurane reached 2%. 10 In a
human study by Muller and associates, the effects of desflu-
rane and isoflurane on intestinal tissue oxygenation during
colorectal surgery were evaluated. It was found that des-
flurane and isoflurane had comparable effects on intestinal
tissue oxygenation. However, during periods of ischemia
for resection and anastomosis, reactive hyperemia was bet-
ter preserved in the patients given isoflurane. 11 This may
have important implications in regaining coordinated and
appropriate bowel function postoperatively and may deter-
mine maintenance with volatile versus total intravenous
anesthesia. Whereas the volatile anesthetics depress spon-
taneous activity and affect blood flow, there is no clear-cut
relationship between adverse GI effects and the use of vola-
tile anesthetics. Also, when considering their use in clinical
practice, there is very little difference between desflurane,
isoflurane, and sevoflurane’s effects on bowel function.
An alternative to maintenance with volatile anesthetics is
total intravenous anesthesia. Propofol is the most common
drug used for this purpose. When used intraoperatively,
propofol-remifentanil anesthetic produced increased intes-
tinal motility as compared to sevoflurane-remifentanil.12
No adverse GI effects were reported, but it did cause a higher
degree of surgeon dissatisfaction. A study by Jensen and col-
leagues looked at bowel recovery after open procedures and
did not find a difference in overall recovery and bowel func-
tion when comparing isoflurane/nitrous oxide, propofol/
air, and propofol/nitrous oxide.13 Even in colorectal cancer
patients there was no difference in inflammatory response
among patients receiving either total intravenous anesthe-
sia with propofol and remifentanil or inhalational anesthe-
sia with sevoflurane and fentanyl. 14,15 There are few data
on the effect of propofol on GI smooth muscle and many of

=== SECTION 6: General ===
15 • Gastrointestinal Physiology and Pathophysiology 	409
the established studies show various and conflicting results
when it comes to the recovery of bowel functions.
Nitrous oxide is 30 times more soluble than nitrogen in
the blood and as such will diffuse into gas-containing cavi-
ties from the blood faster than the nitrogen already present
in those cavities can diffuse out. This is especially impor-
tant in the bowels as gut distention is correlated with the
amount of gas already present in the bowel, the duration
of nitrous oxide administration, and the concentration of
nitrous oxide administered. Although it has been estab-
lished that nitrous oxide causes bowel distention and it is
prudent to avoid nitrous oxide in lengthy abdominal sur-
geries or when the bowel is already distended, the most
recent ENIGMA trial did not relate the use of nitrous oxide
to any significant adverse outcomes.16
Paralysis to achieve favorable surgical conditions is pro-
duced by administration of neuromuscular blocking agents.
Neuromuscular blocking drugs only affect skeletal muscle
so GI motility remains intact. However, special mention of
the depolarizing neuromuscular blocker succinylcholine
should be made. Succinylcholine mimics acetylcholine in
that it produces an initial muscle contraction, which is visi-
ble as fasciculations. This contraction increases intragastric
pressure, which may be so strong as to overcome the tone
of the LES and allow reflux of gastric contents. Aspiration
is certainly a concern, but this should not necessarily pre-
clude the use of succinylcholine. Patient condition, includ-
ing body habitus, technical difficulty of intubation, nothing
by mouth (NPO) status, and comorbidities should be the
determining factors in assessing the risk of aspiration.
Reversal of paralysis using the anticholinesterase, neo-
stigmine, will increase parasympathetic activity and bowel
peristalsis by increasing the frequency and intensity of con-
tractions. In cases of fresh bowel anastomoses, this can be
of concern as the increase in activity could result in dehis-
cence. This is partially offset by simultaneous administra-
tion of the anticholinergic medications, glycopyrrolate or
atropine, which are used to attenuate the bradycardia from
neostigmine. This effect is not seen with sugammadex,
which may be a more prudent choice for reversal in situ-
ations of tenuous bowel anastomoses. There is some data
to support the use of neostigmine in treating postoperative
ileus but the adverse effects of bradycardia, vomiting, and
abdominal cramps may preclude its use.
Surgical procedures on the GI tract produce an exagger-
ated stress response that may predispose to postoperative
bowel dysfunction. Goals of anesthetic care should be to
attenuate the stress response, optimize hemodynamic and
fluid status, and maintain normothermia. 17,18 At present
there is no evidence for recommendations on specific anes-
thetic and analgesic agents to avoid adverse GI effects.!
Effect of Opioids on Bowel Function
Much attention has been given to the use and effects (benefi-
cial and adverse) of opioid administration. There is a desire to
only use adjunct techniques and nonopioid medications; how-
ever, opioids are often necessary to control perioperative pain.
A major adverse effect, and one that is not associated with the
development of opioid tolerance, is reduced GI motility and
constipation. Opioids exert their function on both central and
peripheral receptors, namely mu, delta, and kappa. It is the
central effects that primarily mediate analgesia and produce
the favorable effects. The peripheral effects are the adverse
effects. There is a high density of peripheral mu-opioid recep-
tors in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses. Activation of
these mu-opioid receptors in the myenteric plexus has a dual
effect on the neural pathways controlling motility—it inhibits
excitatory pathways that depress peristaltic contraction and it
also inhibits inhibitory pathways. These inhibitions increase
GI muscular activity and increase resting muscle tone includ-
ing tone in the ileocecal valve and internal anal sphincters.
This produces spasm and nonrhythmic or propulsive motility.
Activation of these receptors is also linked to the inhibition of
acetylcholine release and promotion of nitrous oxide release
that inhibits propulsive motility.19 Together these effects will
delay gastric emptying and slow transit through the intes-
tine. Activation of these receptors in the submucosal plexus
decreases nutrient secretion and increases fluid absorption.
Coupled with reduced motility the stool will remain in the gut
for a longer period of time and as more water is absorbed the
stool becomes hard and dry leading to constipation.20 Other
adverse sequelae include nausea, anorexia, delayed diges-
tion, abdominal pain, excessive straining during bowel move-
ments, and incomplete evacuation.
Many efforts have been made and are currently under-
way to attenuate or avoid opioid-induced bowel dysfunc-
tion. The use of laxatives, stool softeners, and prokinetic
agents, such as metoclopramide and neostigmine, have
shown some success in alleviating opioid-induced constipa-
tion. Potentially switching to a different opioid is also offered
as a treatment option. Tassinari and associates performed
a meta-analysis demonstrating strong evidence support-
ing opioid switch in alleviating constipation, most strongly
for morphine to transdermal fentanyl. 21 Another option is
combining opioids with enteral opioid receptor antagonists.
Naloxone was the first used. It is a nonselective, competitive
opioid receptor antagonist. While its effect on the peripheral
receptors in the gut produced favorable results of reversing
gut motility inhibition, its nonselective profile meant it also
worked on the central receptors and reversed the beneficial
analgesic effect of opioids. Therefore, new attention is given
to pure peripherally acting opioid receptor antagonists.
Methylnaltrexone is a peripheral mu-opioid receptor antag-
onist and does not cross the blood-brain barrier. In healthy
volunteers, the use of methylnaltrexone prevented delay
in orocecal transit time after morphine administration.22
Subsequent systematic reviews demonstrated that meth-
ylnaltrexone and alvimopan were better than placebo in
reversing opioid-induced increased GI transit time and con-
stipation.23–25 However, long-term efficacy and safety have
not been clearly established. Further studies are underway.!
Effect of Open Abdominal Surgery,
Ischemia, Stomas, and Bowel
Anastomosis on Gastrointestinal
Physiology and Function
The surgical procedure itself, even with purposes of correcting
GI pathology, significantly affects GI physiology and function
and predisposes to postoperative ileus. Recently, a standard-
ized definition of postoperative ileus was established as “a

=== SECTION 7: General ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	410
transient cessation of coordinated bowel motility after surgi-
cal intervention, which prevents effective transit of intestinal
contents and/or tolerance of oral intake.”26 Manipulation
of the intestines is the main factor that initiates postopera-
tive ileus. Additional contributors include immobility, elec-
trolyte imbalance from fluid shifts and insensible losses, and
intestinal wall swelling from excessive fluid administration.
In open abdominal procedures, the surgical manipulation of
the bowel induces a degree of trauma that sets in motion the
whole process of postoperative ileus. There are two phases
to uncomplicated postoperative ileus (i.e., in the absence of
complications, such as perforation, bleeding, peritonitis). The
first phase is an early neurogenic phase and the second is an
inflammatory phase. In total, an uncomplicated postopera-
tive ileus lasts about 3 to 4 days.26
The early neurogenic phase results when the intestine is
manipulated, which is more extensive in open procedures
than laparoscopic ones. This manipulation activates the
sympathetic nervous system, increasing the inhibitory neu-
ral input that leads to decreased propulsive movements and
almost complete cessation of GI motility. This lasts about 3
to 4 hours after surgery.
The late inflammatory phase also begins with surgi-
cal manipulation of the intestines. Surgical manipulation
increases sympathetic stimulation of the myenteric plexus,
which promotes the influx of leukocytes into the “traumatized”
areas of the gut. Further release of cytokines, chemokines, and
leukocytes as well as phagocytosis in the traumatized area
occurs and eventually spreads through the entire GI tract.
This inflammatory cascade increases permeability and allows
for translocation of intraluminal bacteria, which further exac-
erbates the inflammatory process. However, peritonitis does
not always develop because the mast cells and neutrophils
are very effective in eliminating the translocated bacteria
in the peritoneal cavity. This process occurs about 3 hours
after intestinal manipulation and continues throughout the
manipulated segment and the rest of the GI tract for the next
24 hours. It eventually subsides and within 3 to 4 days this
uncomplicated ileus is usually resolved.27,28
Mesenteric ischemia, if left untreated, will lead to 100%
mortality. This occurs when the supply of oxygen is insuffi-
cient to meet the oxygen demand of the intestines. It affects
the small and large intestine and is classified as occlusive
or nonocclusive. Etiologies of mesenteric ischemia include:
strangulation, emboli (seen commonly in patients with
atrial fibrillation), complications of aortic surgery or during
cross-clamping, trauma, drug-induced, atherosclerosis, and
inflammatory diseases. There are four stages of mesenteric
ischemia. The first is the hyperactive stage when blood flow
to the intestine is abruptly occluded. This produces severe
pain and overactive peristalsis. There may be passage of
loose stool with blood. The second stage is a paralytic stage
that spreads diffusely across the intestines. The third stage
involves leakage of fluid, proteins, and electrolytes through
the bowel wall into the peritoneum. If the bowel becomes
necrotic then peritonitis develops. The fourth stage is shock.
End-organ damage is apparent and contributes to altered
hemodynamics and critical illness. Treatment involves reper-
fusion of the occluded vessel through revascularization and
possibly bowel resection.29
Bowel resections vary in terms of their effect on the
remaining bowel. The degree of GI dysfunction depends on
the portion of bowel resected. The colon primarily absorbs
water and a full colonic resection is compatible with life.
However, when the small intestine is resected the effect on
the GI system is much more pronounced. The small intes-
tine is responsible for absorbing vitamins and nutrients.
This can be properly maintained if at least a third of the
small bowel remains. The jejunum is the primary site for
digestion and absorption of nutrients. After a jejunal resec-
tion, the ileum is usually able to adapt to fulfill its functions.
The ileum absorbs vitamin B12 and bile salts. If the ileum
is resected (especially more than 100 cm), the remaining
small intestine cannot compensate for the loss of its func-
tion and severe malabsorption and diarrhea will result.
The unabsorbed bile salts enter the colon and stimulate fat
and water secretion. Small intestinal resection will increase
gastric motility but this depends on the site and amount
resected. If the terminal ileum and ileocecal valve are
resected then intestinal content transit speeds up.30
Bowel anastomoses can significantly alter bowel function
in that they disrupt normal motor activity. Partial transec-
tion usually preserves the wave of activity, though complete
transection will interrupt it. There is a loss in myogenic con-
tinuity in that the intestine distal to the transection will no
longer receive signals or respond to the pacemaker in the
proximal duodenum. Now the part distal to transection has
to rely on its own intrinsic slow-wave transmission. This
can be attenuated by close approximation of the muscle
layers. There is motor asynchrony across the anastomotic
site but long-term studies report reasonable MMC activity is
ultimately achieved with time. The mechanism explaining
why this recovery occurs remains uncertain. The transec-
tion and anastomosis have little effect on intestinal homeo-
stasis and are not associated with significant digestion or
absorption side effects.2!
Gastrointestinal System
Nociception
Abdominal visceral pain and its associated symptoms are
common in the GI perioperative period. For an understand-
ing of GI nociception, a detailed knowledge of the anat-
omy and physiology of abdominal visceral innervation is
essential.
ABDOMINAL VISCERA INNERVATION
Abdominal visceral pain signals are carried in both sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic autonomic fibers. 31,32 Innerva-
tion of the parietal peritoneum, abdominal wall muscles,
and skin is supplied by the ventral rami of thoracoabdomi-
nal nerves, which are part of the somatosensory system.
Sympathetic fibers for the upper abdomen, including
the liver, stomach, pancreas, small bowel, and proximal
part of the colon, originate from spinal cord segments T5
to L2. Those preganglionic fibers exit the cord as gray rami
communicants to enter the sympathetic chain in the para-
vertebral region. These fibers terminate in the prevertebral
(subdiaphragmatic) ganglia through splanchnic nerves
and generate the celiac plexus, where they synapse with a
large number of postganglionic, predominantly unmyelin-
ated fibers. Postganglionic fibers will then innervate the

=== SECTION 8: General ===
15 • Gastrointestinal Physiology and Pathophysiology 	411
organs (see Fig. 15.5). 33 Innervation of the lower abdomen
including the descending colon, sigmoid and rectum, blad-
der, and lower ureter originates from T9 to L3 and forms
the inferior mesenteric and hypogastric ganglia and plexus.
Sympathetic 	afferent 	fibers 	transmit 	visceral 	pain,
whereas sympathetic efferent nerves inhibit peristalsis and
gastric distention as well as cause GI vasoconstriction.33
The parasympathetic nervous system supplies the abdomi-
nal viscera proximal to the splenic flexure of the colon via the
vagus nerve. Some of the vagal fibers pass through the prever-
tebral fibers (celiac plexus). The parasympathetic postgangli-
onic neurons are located in the myenteric and submucosal
plexuses. Visceral afferent parasympathetic nerve fibers trans-
mit the sensations of satiety, nausea, and distention, whereas
efferent parasympathetic nerve fibers increase functions such
as secretion, sphincter relaxation, and peristalsis.34–36
The colon, rectum, internal and external genitalia, and
bladder are innervated by fibers from spinal cord segments
S2 to S4, which run with the pelvic nerves (Fig. 15.1). 37–40
Some of the characteristics of abdominal visceral inner-
vation are: (1) they are almost exclusively myelinated
A-delta and unmyelinated C fibers; (2) they have “dual-
function” properties (sensory that carry sensory evoked
potentials and afferent that regulate autonomic flow);42
Parasympathetic
innervation
Sympathetic
innervation
Cardioaccelerator
nerve
Splanchnic
nerve
Splanchnic
nerve
Celiac
ganglion
III
Pons
Spinal cord
Pelvic
nerve
Medulla
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
VII
IX
X
Kidneys
Proximal
colon
Small intestine
Stomach
Respiratory
tract
Heart
Salivary glands
Lacrimal glands
Eye
(circular muscles,
iris)
Eye
(radial muscle, iris)
Ureters
Bladder
Distal colon
Rectum
Genitals
Adrenal gland
Sweat glands
Blood vessels
(trunk)
Blood vessels,
(head and neck)
Small intestine
Stomach
Liver
Spleen
Respiratory
tract
Heart
Colon
Salivary gland
Paraverteral sympathetic ganglion chain	Paraverteral sympathetic ganglion chain	Paraverteral sympathetic ganglion chain	Paravertebral sympathetic ganglion chain
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Cervical
ganglion
Kidneys
Blood vessels
lower
extremities
Bladder
Rectum
Genitals
Superior
mesenteric
ganglion
Inferior
mesenteric
ganglion
Hypogastric
nerve
Fig. 15.1 Schematic diagram of sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Sympathetic innervation of majority
of the GI tract up to the rectum is supplied by the celiac plexus. (From Glick DB. The autonomic nervous system. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia. 7th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010.)

=== SECTION 9: General ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	412
(3) there are an abundance of connections between nerves,
ganglia, and plexuses; (4) there is not a fine and distinct
nerve; (5) considerable variation in anatomy can be found;
(6) visceral innervation anatomy is affected by intraabdom-
inal pathology; and (7) visceral innervation distribution
is diffuse and capable of amplification. Once stimulated, it
could be difficult to stop (self-aggravation).41–46
In summary, the innervation of the GI organs up to the
proximal transverse colon is supplied by the celiac plexus,
and innervation of the descending colon and distal GI tract
comes from the inferior hypogastric plexus. Although each
organ looks like it is innervated from specific cord segments,
the fibers frequently communicate with each other (Table
15.2).!
CELIAC PLEXUS ANATOMY
The celiac plexus is normally composed of two or three
splanchnic nerves:
The greater (superior thoracic) splanchnic nerve comes
from T5 to T9 (fibers can arise as high as T1 and as low as
T11). The greater splanchnic nerve is usually anterolateral
to the T12 vertebral body. It perforates the crura of the dia-
phragm and enters the retroperitoneal space where it joins the
celiac plexus.
The lesser splanchnic nerve is formed from T9 to T11. In 30%
of cases this nerve is not present. Two or more celiac ganglia are
generated, which lie ventrolaterally to the aorta between the
origin of the celiac arterial trunk and the renal arteries.
The celiac ganglia can vary considerably in size and
number on each side. Usually they are oval shaped and can
vary from 0.5 to 4.5 cm in width.
Fusion of these ganglia form a fine nerve plexus that may
extend to the inferior border of the T12 vertebra and lower
border of L2. They are mostly located close to the celiac
artery trunk.46
The plexus and related nervous structures are contained in
the prevertebral retroperitoneal space along with the aorta,
inferior vena cava (IVC), veins of azygos system, lymph nodes,
the cisterna chyli, and diaphragmatic crura (Fig. 15.2).!
ABDOMINAL VISCERAL PAIN
Despite the fact that abdominal pain of visceral origin is a very
common finding during the perioperative period, our knowl-
edge and practice to control this pain are very limited.47
Visceral pain is different from somatic pain in many aspects;
not all organs respond similarly to stimuli, some organs are
more sensitive. For example, the pancreas is more sensitive
than the stomach. Tissue destruction, ischemia, and inflam-
mation will not always cause pain.48 The most remarkable
difference between visceral and superficial structures is the
fact that visceral pain is poorly localized, produces strong
affective responses, and refers to other locations with intense
regional or muscle spasms and autonomic instability.49–51
The referral properties of visceral pain have been attributed
to the conjunction of visceral and somatic inputs to the spinal
cord and CNS. For the same reason, visceral pain can have
somatic components. Merging of these inputs can modify
pain sensation distal to the site of visceral inflammation, or
pain from one intraabdominal organ can refer to another.40
Visceral pain is fervently associated with emotional fluc-
tuation. IBS is thought to be related to gut-brain interaction
and autonomic dysregulation.52
It was found that induced sadness was attenuated by
fatty acid infusion, and increased neural activity in the
part of the brain processing emotions was also observed. 53
Probiotic bacteria are beneficial in stress-related disorders,
such as anxiety and depression, and during the course of
common comorbidities and some bowel disorders. 54 !
VISCERAL PAIN TREATMENT
Opioids are still the mainstay of visceral pain treatment,
although their usage has been limited by many side effects
such as decreased gut motility and constipation, sedation,
nausea, and vomiting. In addition, prolonged usage of
narcotics is associated with opioid-induced hyperalgesia
and tolerance. 55 Usage of acetaminophen, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, and serotonin components have
been suggested, but the results are not specific. 56 !
VISCERAL PAIN BLOCK TECHNIQUES
Noxious pain impulses originating from abdominal viscera
can be blocked by the following regional anesthesia tech-
niques (Fig. 15.3)
1. Spinal anesthesia extending to at least the level of T5
2. Epidural anesthesia covering T5 to Tl2 dermatomes
3. Paravertebral blocks comprising T5 to L2 spinal segments
4. Selective T5 to L2 sympathetic chain block
5. Celiac/splanchnic nerve block
TABLE 15.2 	Summary of Visceral Innervation on Gastrointestinal Tract47
Organ 	Sympathetic Sensory Supply 	Parasympathetic Sensory Supply
Liver and biliary tract 	T5-T10 via Celiac plexus 	Vagus nerve
Stomach 	T7-T9 via Celiac plexus 	Vagus nerve
Pancreas 	T6-T10 via Celiac plexus 	Vagus nerve
Small bowel 	T9-L1 via Celiac plexus 	Vagus nerve
Cecum, ascending and transverse colon 	T9-L1 via Celiac plexus 	Vagus nerve
Descending colon 	T9-T12 via Celiac plexus 	S2-S4 via Pelvic nerves
Sigmoid, rectum 	T11-L1 via Inferior hypogastric plexus 	S2-S4 via Pelvic nerves

=== SECTION 10: General ===
15 • Gastrointestinal Physiology and Pathophysiology 	413
Suprarenal gland Left celiac ganglion
Superior mesenteric
artery
Inferior mesenteric
artery
Superior mesenteric
ganglion
Inferior mesenteric
ganglion
Sacrovertebral angle
Common iliac vein
Common iliac artery
Greater splanchnic
nerve 	Greater splanchnic
nerve
Lesser splanchnic
nerve
Lower splanchnic
nerve
Right celiac
ganglion
Aorticorenal
ganglion Aorticorenal
ganglion	Renal artery
Renal artery
Communicating
branch
Branch to
aortic plexus
Branch to
aortic plexus
Sympathetic
trunk
Fig. 15.2 Anatomy of the abdominal sympathetic trunk. (Redrawn from http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gray847.png#mediaviewer.)
Brainstem
From spinal cord,
medulla, hypothalamus
Spinal nerves
T1-L3
Cranial nerves-
III, VII, IX, X
Sacral nerves
S2-S4
Sacral outflow
Cranial outflow
Parasympathetic division	Sympathetic division
Pre
Pre
Pre
Post
Post
Viscus
Viscus 	Collateral ganglion
White
RC
Gray ramus
communicans
Post
Sympathetic ganglion
To blood vessels,
sweat glands
Fig. 15.3 Regional anesthetic techniques on gastrointestinal (GI) visceral sympathetic innervation: different regional techniques which can block sym-
pathetic innervation of the GI tract at different levels. (From Glick DB. The autonomic nervous system. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2010.)

=== SECTION 11: General ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	414
Based on the type and extent of the regional technique, its
effect on the GI physiology is different. Of note, the aforemen-
tioned regional anesthesia techniques are associated with
the blockade of the sympathetic nervous system, whereas the
parasympathetic system usually remains intact.!
VISCERAL/CELIAC PLEXUS BLOCK
Blockage 	of 	the 	splanchnic/celiac 	plexus 	has 	been
approached in many ways:
Intraperitoneal Regional Anesthesia or Peritoneal
Lavage
Abdominal visceral pain can be blocked simply by instilling
local anesthetic into the peritoneal cavity. A recent meta-
analysis by Boddy and associates of intraperitoneal regional
anesthesia in laparoscopic surgeries found an overall ben-
efit, although there was no consistent analgesia, but also a
remarkable absence of complications and side effects.57!
Celiac Plexus Block—Posterior and Trans-Crural
Approach
Radiography, fluoroscopy, or computed tomography scan
is usually needed to perform this block safely, especially in
lytic blocks.
This approach requires a special needle, usually a 15-cm,
20- or 22-G Chiba needle. The patient is in the prone or lat-
eral position and the needle is inserted below the tip of the
12th rib on the left side. The needle is aimed at a 45-degree
angle to touch the lateral side of the L1 vertebral body at a
depth of 7 to 9 cm. Subsequently, the needle is nearly fully
redirected 5 to 10 degrees and advanced to a depth of 11
to 14 cm. In this situation the pulsation of the aorta on the
needle can sometimes be felt (Fig. 15.4).
Determination of the correct vertebral level is imprecise in
patients with absence of the 12th rib, a markedly downslop-
ing of the rib, or in other congenital abnormalities.!
Celiac Plexus Block—Anterior Approach
The abdomen is opened and the left lobe of the liver is
retracted upward. The stomach is pulled gently down-
ward and to the left thereby exposing and stretching
the lesser omentum. The index finger of the operator is
then inserted at the highest possible point of the incision,
palpating the pulsating aorta through the lesser omen-
tum. The aorta is pushed aside to the left by passing the
tip of the finger to the vertebrae whereby it is separated
from the vena cava. A fine 22-G spinal needle is inserted
alongside the finger and in the loose, retroperitoneal, pre-
vertebral tissue between the IVC and aorta. Diluted local
anesthetic is injected in this area after careful aspiration.
The tip of the needle should be close to the diaphragm,
above the origin of the celiac trunk, in the midline. A
similar approach was described by Lillemoe in 1992 for
postoperative pain control in pancreatic cancer patients:
after lesser omentum exposure, the left index and middle
fingers are placed on either side of the aorta and pulled
caudad until the upper border of the pancreas is identi-
fied and 20 mL of solution is injected on either side of the
aorta (Fig. 15.5). 58
Endoscopic Ultrasound-Guided Celiac Plexus Block
Recent recognition that the celiac ganglia can be visual-
ized and accessed by endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) now
allows for a direct injection into the celiac plexus. The
patient is placed in the left lateral decubitus position and
under conscious sedation. From the posterior side of the
lesser curvature of the gastric fundus EUS can visual-
ize the aorta in a longitudinal plane. The aorta is traced
distally to the celiac trunk, and the injection delivered
around the celiac trunk. Meta-analysis has shown that
EUS-guided celiac plexus blocks are safe and efficient
(Fig. 15.6). 59 !
A
B	Kidney
A 	IVC
45°
7–8
cm
Fig. 15.4 (A) Schematic view of the posterior approach. Celiac plexus can be blocked by insertion of a 20- to 22-gauge 15-cm spinal needle (Chiba
needle) at the level of T12. (B) Positioning and surface landmarks. (From Wedel DJ, Horlocker TT. Nerve blocks. In: Miller RD, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia. 7th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010.)

=== SECTION 12: TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF VISCERAL PLEXUS ===
15 • Gastrointestinal Physiology and Pathophysiology 	415
TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF VISCERAL PLEXUS
BLOCKS
There is no established standard technique. It is important
to completely disrupt all of the impulse traffic in the visceral
innervation, as these impulses are widely spread and can be
reinstated via very fine nerves.
Unfortunately, the success of splanchnic nerve and celiac
plexus blocks cannot be verified by any objective signs. Hypo-
tension is not a regular finding. If patients do have upper
abdominal pain, analgesia typically results within a few min-
utes after the block. Failure of pain to subside is not only due
to inappropriate technique but also due to the involvement of
visceral plexuses, such as the hypogastric plexus.
Bilateral injections of
50% alcohol into
celiac ganglia
Celiac
axis
IVC
Ao
Fig. 15.5 Celiac plexus block (anterior approach): intraoperative celiac plexus block is performed using a 20- to 22-gauge spinal needle. Injection is
performed at each side of the aorta and the level of celiac axis. (Redrawn from Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, Kaufman HS, et al. Chemical splancnicectomy in
patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer. A prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg. 1993;217:447–457.)
A 	B
Fig. 15.6 Endoscopic ultrasound-guided celiac plexus block: (A) Ultrasound beams use lesser curvature of the gastric fundus as media to visualize the
celiac trunk. (B) Ultrasonic image of celiac ganglia and needle during performance of endoscopic ultrasound-guided celiac plexus block. CT, Celiac trunk.
(From Levy M, Wiersema M. EUS-guided celiac plexus neurolysis and celiac plexus block. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003;57(7):923–930.)

=== SECTION 13: General ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	416
There is little information about the duration of a suc-
cessful block induced by local anesthetics. Most of the
blocks have been a combination of local anesthetic and lytic
therapy for chronic pain. In order to avoid toxic side effects,
local anesthetic doses must be reduced when the block is
combined with another major regional anesthetic tech-
nique such as abdominal wall blocks.!
COMPLICATIONS OF VISCERAL PAIN BLOCKS
The complication rate is between 0.5% and 32%, depend-
ing on the method, as radiologic methods are associated
with a reduced rate of complications (Box 15.1).
Dilation of the capacitance vessels in the splanchnic area
will cause hypotension. Subarachnoid injection happens
mostly with a posterior approach, and an alcohol injection
can cause paraplegia.
A chylothorax can result from damage of the retroperito-
neal lymph nodes.
The most devastating complication occurs with vascu-
lar trauma, thrombosis, and retroperitoneal hematoma. 60!
INDICATIONS FOR A VISCERAL PAIN BLOCK
Post-Laparatomy Pain Relief
Visceral pain blocks are usually associated with somato-
sensory pain controls using central neuroaxial regional
anesthesia techniques, such as epidural analgesia or para-
vertebral analgesia. A combination of a celiac plexus block
with any other regional anesthesia technique is rarely used.!
Cancer Pain
Splanchnic/celiac plexus blocks have been used for biliary
and pancreatic cancers. The details of this indication of vis-
ceral pain control are discussed in the chronic pain man-
agement chapter (Chapter 51).!
EFFECTS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA ON
GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
The degree to which the GI tract is affected by regional anes-
thesia depends on the type and extent of the block. Epidural
analgesia, especially thoracic epidural analgesia (TEA),
has been used extensively for a wide variety of GI surger-
ies. The clinical outcome of TEA after GI surgeries has been
reviewed extensively in the literature; the focus of this chap-
ter is its effect on GI physiology.
Effect on Gastrointestinal Motility and
Postoperative Ileus
As described, postoperative ileus is a very common phe-
nomenon in patients who undergo major abdominal sur-
gery. Postoperative ileus is a temporary state of GI motor
dysfunction that occurs after surgery in the abdominal
cavity. This includes disruption of normal coordinated
movements of the GI tract, 61 nonmechanical obstruction
of the bowel, activation of the inhibitory reflexes, inflam-
matory 	mediators, 	bowel 	manipulation, 	electrolyte
disturbances, opioid administration, sympathetic over-
activity with surgical pain, and postoperative pain. 62–66
Transit time of the stomach may extend 24 to 48 hours
and colon transfer time may increase 48 to 72 hours.
Some of these effects may continue for up to 3 to 4 days
after surgery. 67,68
The main pathophysiologic event in postoperative ileus
is neuroimmune interaction, which is based on the bidirec-
tional communication between the immune system within
and outside the GI tract and the autonomic nervous system.69
Manipulation of the intestines and the stress response
associated with postoperative pain are the key fac-
tors initiating postoperative ileus. The surgical stress
response is a multifaceted, neurohumoral response to
a surgical stimulation and can be associated with con-
siderable morbidity, including a systemic inflammatory
response syndrome, which is associated with the release
of systemic inflammatory response and adrenaline and
noradrenaline hormones. This sympathetic overactivity
will constrain mobility and directly inhibit gut smooth
muscle via activation of α- and β-adrenergic receptors
resulting in postoperative ileus. 70 Epidural administra-
tion of local anesthetic or opioids has been shown to sup-
press these responses. 71–73
Epidural block with deposition of local anesthetic within
the epidural space results in blockade of the afferent and
efferent sympathetic-mediated GI reflexes, but parasympa-
thetic innervation is left intact. The effect of an imbalanced
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system has been
associated with improved GI blood flow and anastomotic
mucosal perfusion. This controls pain and decreases the
need for opioids.74–78
However, it should be noted that severe hypotension
(>50% reduction in systolic blood pressure) may be associ-
ated with worsened local perfusion.79,80 Vasoactive drugs,
such as norepinephrine, can attenuate this effect and
improve colonic perfusion.81
In general, epidural analgesia can effectively decrease the
incidence of postoperative ileus. A Cochrane review showed
that epidural usage reduces postoperative ileus by 36 hours
when a local anesthetic regimen was used as compared to
an opioid-based regimen.82!
Effect on Enteric Anastomosis Dehiscence
Unopposed parasympathetic activity with blockage of sym-
pathetic fibers has increased concerns among clinicians
that the increased mobility and intraluminal pressures will
lead to anastomotic leaks and possibly rupture.83 However,
animal studies have failed to show any difference in anasto-
motic bursting pressure when epidural anesthesia is com-
pared to general anesthesia.84 In fact, it could be argued
Hypotension
Diarrhea
Intravascular injection and vascular trauma
Subarachnoid or epidural injection and paraplegia
Renal injury
Pneumothorax
Chylothorax
Damage to surrounding structures and retroperitoneal hematoma
Peritonitis and abscess
BOX 15.1 	Complications of Celiac Plexus
Blocks

=== SECTION 14: General ===
15 • Gastrointestinal Physiology and Pathophysiology 	417
that with improvement of GI blood flow and tissue oxygen-
ation the neuroaxial block can actually reduce the risk of
anastomotic breakdown. However, the effect of neuroaxial
blocks after GI procedures and laparotomies on enteric
anastomotic leakage is not supported in the literature.81,85!
Effect on Nutrition
The early postoperative period after GI surgery is character-
ized by a systemic stress response and catabolic activity. This
effect, in conjunction with a lack of nutrition, results in post-
operative weakness and muscle wasting. As discussed previ-
ously, epidural analgesia has been shown to decrease opioid
requirements and reduce postoperative ileus. This, in turn,
enhances enteral feeding.86 Therefore, blockade of afferent
stimuli and the endocrine metabolic responses, as well as the
improvement in catabolism seen with epidural analgesia, are
part of an enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocol
for major GI surgeries to facilitate oral nutrition.87!
Effect on Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
Pain management plays a large role in postoperative nau-
sea and vomiting therapy. 88 Avoiding systemic opioids and
the use of epidural analgesia helps to reduce the incidence
of nausea and vomiting. However, in the setting of regional
anesthesia, attention should be paid to unopposed vagal
activity, local anesthetic systemic toxicity, hypotension,
and medication administration.
Spinal anesthesia poses the highest risk for the develop-
ment of nausea and vomiting and is seen in 20% of patients.
The effects of spinal anesthesia, especially with T6 to L1
blockade, include sympathetic innervation and unopposed
vagal activity and result in GI hyperperistalsis, nausea,
and vomiting. 89 In addition, TEA or spinal anesthesia that
results in systemic hypotension severe enough to cause
cerebral ischemia can cause nausea and vomiting.90
Effect on Gastrointestinal Blood Flow and Volume
The degree of arterial hypotension induced by spinal or
epidural anesthesia is directly related to the extent of the
blockade, the dose of local anesthetic used, and baseline
hemodynamics.91 Lumbar epidural anesthesia leads to
arterial and venous dilation at the segments affected by
the anesthetic. The constriction of the proximal part of
the splanchnic vasculature shifts blood volume from the
splanchnic system into the systemic circulation and usually
results in preservation of stressed volume and blood pres-
sure. TEA is associated with pronounced mesenteric vaso-
dilation and arterial hypotension, while intestinal blood
flow and oxygen consumption are maintained. A study
using labeled red cells demonstrated that epidural anesthe-
sia with sensory block at T4 to T5 increased blood volume
in both the intrathoracic and splanchnic vasculature. The
addition of a vasoconstrictor decreased volume within the
splanchnic region, but increased volume within the thorax.
The authors estimated that the use of a vasoconstrictor dur-
ing TEA led to a shift of approximately 1 L of blood from the
splanchnic area into the thoracic and systemic circulation.92
Infusion of fluid or the use of adrenergic agonists apparently
increases stressed volume. Infusion of fluid increases total
(stressed and unstressed) blood volume, whereas adrener-
gic agonists move existing blood volume from unstressed
to stressed.93 In many situations, the use of α-adrenergic
agonists might be more beneficial than infusion of fluid.
Because veins are much more sensitive to adrenergic stimu-
lation than arteries are, small doses of α-adrenergic agonists
in normovolemic patients would constrict veins (increasing
stressed volume) without affecting arteries or jeopardizing
tissue perfusion.!
ENHANCED RECOVERY AFTER SURGERY
FOR GASTROINTESTINAL PROCEDURES—
PHYSIOLOGIC BASIS
ERAS is an interdisciplinary, multimodal concept aimed
at accelerating postoperative convalescence and reduc-
ing general morbidity by simultaneously applying several
interventions. ERAS represents a paradigm shift in periop-
erative care. It reexamines traditional practice by replacing
it with evidence-based practices.94
ERAS for GI procedures highlights a perioperative regi-
men with emphasis on95,96:
1. Regional anesthesia
2. Avoidance of opioids
3. Multimodal analgesia
4. Nutrition and preoperative carbohydrates
5. Selective bowel preparation
6. Fluid optimization
7. Temperature control
8. Early removal of drains and tubes
9. Early mobilization
10. Early oral intake
The use of ERAS protocols has been associated with
shorter hospitalizations.97!
PHYSIOLOGIC BASIS OF ERAS
Perioperative Pain Control
Many aspects of regional anesthesia, opioid-sparing anes-
thesia, and multimodal analgesia have already been dis-
cussed. The effect of pain control on postoperative outcomes
has also been evaluated in multiple studies and is an insepa-
rable part of ERAS protocols for many surgeries including
GI procedures.98–100 The favorable physiologic effects on
the respiratory and cardiovascular systems by epidural
analgesia may serve as yet another reason as to why epi-
dural analgesia is a devoted part of ERAS protocols.101–102!
Preoperative Carbohydrate Loading and Early
Postoperative Feeding
There is strong evidence in animal studies demonstrating
that fed animals tolerate stress much better than fasted
animals. Perioperative oral carbohydrates raise insulin
sensitivity by 50%. This means there is 50% less insulin
resistance in the postoperative period, which also amelio-
rates ilium barrier failure. There is also less risk of devel-
opment of hyperglycemic events and an improvement
in retention of protein and lean body mass.103,105 Enteric
feeding is associated with prevention of bacterial transloca-
tion104 or gut barrier failure.105 Carbohydrate loading shifts
the cellular metabolism to an anabolic state that will sup-
port postoperative nutrition.106–108
Most of the national and international societies now
recommend a 6-hour preoperative fast for solids and a

=== SECTION 15: General ===
SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	418
2-hour fast for clear fluids, which includes carbohydrate
drinks.109–112
In order to maintain metabolic and nutritional homoeo-
stasis, early postoperative feeding has been suggested.
A small study on patients after major colorectal surgery
showed that immediate postoperative enteral feeding does
not result in a net loss of body nitrogen.113 !
Temperature Control
In addition to the adverse effects of hypothermia (<35°C)
on coagulation, cardiac, respiratory, and neurologic func-
tion, hypothermia triggers a whole-body thermoregulatory
vasoconstriction response. Consequently, it reduces cuta-
neous flow and can result in tissue hypoxia and failure of
the humoral immune defense system. 114–116 Hypothermia
is associated with a threefold increase in the incidence of
surgical site infection.117 !
Nasogastric Tubes
Regular use of nasogastric tubes following major
intraabdominal surgery is for gastric decompression,
thereby preventing anastomotic leakage and promot-
ing early return of bowel function. However, routine
use has been questioned as it is very uncomfortable for
the patient and there is an associated risk of develop-
ing pulmonary complications, delays in the return of
bowel function, and increasing the rate of wound infec-
tions. 118 In addition, the presence of gastric tubes is
associated with increased gastric secretion and motil-
ity—a physiologic response to the presence of a foreign
body.!
Bowel Preparation
Bowel preparation for major GI procedures has been
implemented in order to reduce postoperative compli-
cations related to infected bowel content, 119 with poly-
ethylene glycol a most popular preparation. Adverse
physiologic effects of this bowel preparation include
decreased exercise capacity, lower weight, increased
plasma osmolality, decreased urea and phosphate, and
reduced plasma calcium and potassium. 120 These effects
along with fasting can produce a very unpleasant experi-
ence for the patient.
The routine use of bowel preparation has been ques-
tioned repeatedly. In fact, recent studies have shown that
mechanical bowel preparation can be safely omitted before
elective colorectal surgery.121,122!
Drains
Intraabdominal drains are placed to prevent accumula-
tions of intraabdominal collections, to quickly discover
postoperative bleeding, to diagnose anastomotic leakage,
and to drain intraabdominal abscesses. However, routine
use of drains simply placed prophylactically after major
abdominal surgeries has recently been questioned. These
drains are not innocuous as they can be associated with
bacterial contamination, wound infection, incisional
hernia, intestinal obstruction and fistula formation, and
bleeding. 123 There is insufficient evidence to support the
notion that routine use of drainage after colorectal anas-
tomoses can prevent anastomotic leakage or any other
related complications. 124 !
Fluid Management
All patients having elective surgery undergo a preoperative
starvation period that results in a fluid deficit. Typically, it is
not enough to produce major fluid shifts, but it may stimu-
late the production of antidiuretic hormone, atrial natri-
uretic peptide, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
and an increase in sympathetic activity. This relative hypo-
volemia is also more pronounced in patients who receive
bowel preparation, experience diarrhea or vomiting, are
exposed to high temperatures, or have high nasogastric
tube output.
Recent NPO guidelines allow patients to have clear flu-
ids up to 2 hours prior to surgery. 125 Intraoperative fluid
management takes into account the preoperative fluid
deficit, the presence of a regional anesthesia technique,
hemorrhage, and third-space losses. However, prudent
administration of intravenous fluids is necessary as free and
rapid administration of salt and water will increase capil-
lary hydrostatic pressure, cause tissue and bowel edema,
and adversely affect anastomotic integrity. Optimizing fluid
administration should focus on increasing tissue perfusion
and oxygen delivery, and modulation of the hormonal and
inflammatory response.126!
Mobilization and Early Ambulation
Early postoperative ambulation is recommended for pre-
vention and treatment of postoperative ileus. 127,128 It is
believed that early ambulation helps with the restoration
of normal bowel function. However, studies demonstrate
that GI myoelectrical activity patterns are not always
expedited by early postoperative ambulation; at least there
is no correlation with the extent of ambulation. 129 Yet,
early ambulation confers many other advantages, specifi-
cally prevention of postoperative thromboembolism and
pulmonary complications. 130,131
Acknowledgment
The editors and publisher would like to thank Drs. Matthias
F. Stopfkuchen-Evans and Simon Gelman for contributing a
chapter on this topic in the prior edition of this work. It has
served as the foundation for the current chapter.
Complete references available online at expertconsult.com.
References
1. Agur A, et al. Grant’s Atlas of Anatomy. Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2005.
2. Andreoli TE, Carpenter CCJ, Cecil RL. Andreoli and Carpenter’s Cecil
Essentials of Medicine. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007. Print.
3. Quiqley EM, et al. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1998;31:889–900.
4. Seok JW. J Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2011;17(2):189–191.
5. Patcharatrakul T, Gonlachanvit S. J Neurogastroenterol Motil.
2013;19(3):395–404.
6. Sarna SK. Colonic Motility: From Bench to Bedside. San Rafael: Mor-
gan & Claypool Life Sciences; 2010.
7. Thompson W, et al. Gut. 1999;45(suppl 2):1143–1147.
8. Castedal M, et al. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2000;14(5):571–577.
9. Weiskopf RB, et al. Anesthesiology. 1994;80(5):1035–1045.
10. Hopster K, et al. Vet J. 2015;205(1):62–68.
11. Muller M, et al. Anaesthesia. 2002;57(2):110–115.
12. Desmet M, et al. Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica. 2016.
13. Jensen AG, et al. Can J Anaesth. 1992;39(9):938–943.

