=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_001_full ===
=== TOPIC: KEY POINTS ===

250
KEY POINTS
Consciousness, Memory,
and Anesthesia
GEORGE A. MASHOUR and KANE O. PRYOR
9
Introduction
SCIENTIFIC AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE
Consciousness and memory are among the most fascinating
and complex subjects in all of science. The richness of human
consciousness and memory—and the ability to express this
richness in language—is a defining characteristic of homo
sapiens. Consciousness and memory also have clinical rel-
evance for the anesthesiologist; together, the experience
and explicit episodic recall of surgical events is known as
the problem of “intraoperative awareness.” When formally
assessed, this complication occurs in approximately 1 to 2
cases per 1000 1-3 and is associated with a high incidence
of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 4,5 The incidence of
intraoperative consciousness without recall is substantially
higher.6 To advance the field of perioperative brain moni-
toring, a detailed understanding of the neurobiology of con-
sciousness, memory, and anesthesia is required.!
Consciousness
DEFINITIONS
The field of consciousness studies has been plagued by the
indiscriminate use of the term “consciousness.” When we
refer to consciousness, we mean subjective experience. In
simple terms, it is what we lose when we have dreamless
sleep and what we regain again in the morning upon awak-
ening. There are, however, several important definitions
and distinctions that should be considered.
1. Awareness: Cognitive neuroscientists and philoso-
phers use the term “awareness” to mean only subjective
experience. In clinical anesthesiology, we (inaccurately)
use the term “awareness” to include both consciousness
and explicit episodic memory7 (the taxonomy of memory
will be discussed in the next major section of the chap-
ter).
2. Connected versus disconnected consciousness:
Connected consciousness is the experience of environ-
mental stimuli (such as surgery), whereas disconnected
consciousness is an endogenous experience (such as a
dream state).8
3. Consciousness versus responsiveness: An individ-
ual may fully experience a stimulus (such as the com-
mand “Open your eyes!”) but not be able to respond (as
when a patient is paralyzed but conscious during sur-
gery).9
There have been a number of theories proposed to
explain the mechanisms of consciousness and general
anesthesia. Advances in neuroscience, however, have
enabled us to move beyond speculative frameworks and
focus on a systems-based approach to both subjects. 10
The remainder of this section on consciousness adopts
such an approach by discussing (1) brainstem and hypo-
thalamic nuclei regulating the sleep-wake cycle (and
therefore arousal states) (Figs. 9.1 and 9.2); (2) the role
of the thalamus in consciousness and anesthesia; (3)
cortical-subcortical connectivity, with a focus on the
thalamocortical system, which is thought to mediate the
experiential component of consciousness; and (4) cortico-
cortical communication.!
!□! Mechanisms of consciousness and memory, and their interruption by general anesthetics, are
important scientific problems that have clinical relevance for the practice of anesthesiology.
!□! Consciousness is characterized by both wakefulness (i.e., the brain being aroused) and aware-
ness (i.e., subjective experience).
!□! Anesthetics act at structures in the brainstem, hypothalamus, and basal forebrain that regulate
sleep-wake states, which may account for loss of wakefulness.
!□! Anesthetics disrupt connectivity and communication across cortical and thalamocortical net-
works, which may account for loss of awareness.
!□! Memory can be subdivided into explicit (conscious) and implicit (unconscious) recall; an exam-
ple of explicit episodic recall is remembering a surgical event.
!□! Suppression of explicit episodic recall is one of the most potent effects of most general anes-
thetics.
!□! Effects on the hippocampus, amygdala, and prefrontal cortex—as well as the connectivity of
these structures—may account for anesthetic-induced amnesia, even before loss of conscious-
ness.

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_002_full ===
=== TOPIC: SUBCORTICAL NUCLEI REGULATING AROUSAL ===

9 • Consciousness, Memory, and Anesthesia 	251
SUBCORTICAL NUCLEI REGULATING AROUSAL
It was hypothesized in the mid-1990s that anesthetics sup-
press consciousness by actions at the subcortical nuclei that
evolved to control sleep-wake cycles. 11 The past decades
have supported the hypothesis that anesthetics interact
with a number of these sleep-wake centers, 12,13 although
precise interactions and contributions to the state of gen-
eral anesthesia have yet to be elucidated. The following is
a description of select subcortical nuclei in the brainstem
and hypothalamus that mediate sleep-wake cycles14 and,
potentially, some traits of anesthesia.
Brainstem
Locus ceruleus. Norepinephrine is synthesized in the locus
ceruleus (LC), which is located in the pons and projects
widely throughout the cortex.15 Like other monoaminergic
neuronal populations, LC activity is highest during waking
consciousness, decreased during nonrapid eye movement
(NREM) sleep, and at its nadir during rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep. 16,17 Thus LC is associated with cortical arousal
only during wakefulness and not with the cortical activa-
tion during REM sleep. LC neurons are hyperpolarized by
halothane.18 The role of norepinephrine (generated by LC)
Fig. 9.1 Neurobiology of wakefulness. Multiple neurochemical systems in subcortical regions (shown here in rodent brain) promote arousal and activa-
tion of the cortex. Monoaminergic neurons (light green) in the rostral brainstem and caudal hypothalamus innervate the cortex as well as many subcor-
tical regions including the hypothalamus and thalamus. These monoaminergic regions include noradrenergic neurons (locus coeruleus), serotonergic
neurons (dorsal and median raphe nuclei), dopaminergic neurons (ventral tegmental area), and histaminergic neurons (tuberomammillary nucleus).
Wake-promoting signals also arise from cholinergic regions (dark green with hatching), including the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental
nuclei and basal forebrain. General anesthetics have been demonstrated to suppress many of these regions. (Redrawn from Scammell TE, Arrigoni E,
Lipton JO. Neural circuitry of wakefulness and sleep. Neuron. 2017;93[4]:747–765.)
Fig. 9.2 Neurobiology of slow-wave sleep. GABA-ergic neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic area and median preoptic nucleus in the hypothala-
mus (shown here in rodent brain) promote sleep by inhibiting wake-promoting neurons in the caudal hypothalamus and brainstem. These hypo-
thalamic nuclei are activated by general anesthetics. (Redrawn from Scammell TE, Arrigoni E, Lipton JO. Neural circuitry of wakefulness and sleep. Neuron.
2017;93[4]:747–765.)

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_003_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	252
in anesthesia is further supported by studies demonstrating
that barbiturate anesthesia time is increased by antagoniz-
ing norepinephrine and reduced by agonizing it. 19,20 Nor-
epinephrine transmission in the basal forebrain may be
of particular relevance to anesthetic depth.21 It has been
found that LC noradrenergic neurons modulate the state
of isoflurane anesthesia as well as emergence therefrom.22
Of note, administration of ketamine is associated with an
increase of activity in the LC 23 and appears to contribute to
its anesthetic effects.24
LC and the role of norepinephrine in hypnosis are of par-
ticular interest due to the role of the α-2 agonist dexmedeto-
midine in clinical care. Microinjection of dexmedetomidine
in the LC results in reduced levels of consciousness that
can be prevented by coadministration of the α-2 antago-
nist atipamezole. 25 After exposure to dexmedetomidine,
brain changes somewhat mimic NREM sleep in that the
LC and tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) are deactivated,
whereas the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus (VLPO) is acti-
vated.26 Data in dopamine-β-hydroxylase knockout mice
(which lack the ability to synthesize norepinephrine) dem-
onstrate a hypersensitivity to dexmedetomidine, suggesting
alternative mechanisms of action. 27 However, selective
knockdown of α-2A adrenergic receptors from LC pre-
vent dexmedetomidine-induced loss of righting reflex,28 a
marker of general anesthesia in rodents.!
Laterodorsal/pedunculopontine tegmentum. Along
with the basal forebrain, the laterodorsal tegmentum (LDT)
and pedunculopontine tegmentum (PPT) in the pons are
the brain’s source of acetylcholine. 29 There are direct pro-
jections to the thalamus from LDT/PPT with a known role
in the generation of slow oscillations and sleep spindles,30
which together represent a neurophysiologic sign that
information transfer to the cortex is likely blocked. 31 As
with the noradrenergic LC, activity of the LDT/PPT is high
during waking consciousness and decreases during NREM
sleep.15 However, in contrast to the LC and other mono-
aminergic neurons, the cholinergic LDT/PPT is also active
during REM sleep, during which the cortex is aroused. Fur-
thermore, activation of cholinergic neurons in LDT or PPT
induces REM sleep.32 Thus, both states of cortical activa-
tion across the sleep-wake cycle are associated with high
cholinergic tone. General anesthetics modulate cholinergic
projections from the LDT/PPT. Sleep spindles occur during
halothane anesthesia and are associated with decreased
cholinergic transmission to the medial pontine reticular
formation (PRF). 33,34 There is evidence that synaptic and
extrasynaptic γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors play a
role in modulating LDT neurons,35 which could provide a
direct link to molecular mechanisms of numerous general
anesthetics. However, there has been relatively little study
of the role of LDT/PPT in anesthetic mechanisms, with a
greater focus on cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain.!
Pontine reticular formation. The PRF is part of the
reticular activating system, which plays an important role
in cortical arousal. Although GABA is the primary inhibi-
tory neurotransmitter in the brain, the actions of GABA in
the PRF are associated with cortical arousal. 36 For example,
there is increased time spent in the waking state when the
GABAA receptor agonist muscimol is microinjected in the
PRF.37 When the GABA A antagonist bicuculline is micro-
injected, wakefulness is suppressed, but REM sleep (another
state of cortical arousal) is triggered. Vanini and colleagues
found that decreased levels of GABA in the PRF correlated
with isoflurane-induced unconsciousness, muscular hypo-
tonia, and decreased respiratory rate. 38 Since the effects of
anesthetics are normally associated with a potentiation of
GABA activity, these findings highlight that a specific neu-
roanatomic and neurochemical milieu can play a unique
and unexpected role in the mechanisms of consciousness
and anesthesia. In addition, Vanini and colleagues found
that GABA-ergic transmission in the rat PRF modulates
the loss of consciousness induced by isoflurane but does not
appear to affect emergence,39 providing evidence for asym-
metry between the two processes.
The mesopontine tegmental anesthesia area is located in
the PRF. When pentobarbital is microinjected in this area,
a reversible state with anesthetic traits is induced.40 More
recently, this phenomenon has been defined with greater
spatial resolution, with the identification of around 1900
neurons in this area that can induce general anesthesia.41!
Ventral tegmental area. Dopaminergic neurons of the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) in the midbrain have not
classically been considered key mediators of the sleep-wake
cycle because of relatively less evidence of state-dependent
changes compared with neurons in other brainstem nuclei.
This view has been challenged in sleep neurobiology.42 A
dopaminergic pathway regulating sleep-wake states has
been identified in Drosophila43 and dopaminergic neurons
of the VTA have more recently been found to play a role in
mammalian sleep.44 There has been renewed interest in
the ability of dopaminergic activity to reverse or accelerate
recovery from general anesthesia. Studies of the dopamine
agonist methylphenidate have revealed an ability to reverse
the sedative effects of both isoflurane and propofol.45,46
VTA appears to be the source of the dopaminergic transmis-
sion mediating arousal during exposure to anesthesia, as
evidenced by the fact that electrical stimulation of the VTA
or selective stimulation of VTA dopaminergic neurons can
reverse anesthetic-induced unconsciousness.47,48!
Hypothalamus
Ventrolateral preoptic nucleus. The anterior hypo-
thalamus has long been hypothesized to play a role in sleep-
wake regulation.49 VLPO is a structure in this region that
transmits GABA and galanin.50 Neurons in VLPO are maxi-
mally active during NREM and REM sleep; 51,52 the median
preoptic nucleus (MnPO) is also active during sleep. Of note,
the activity profile of GABA-ergic neurons in VLPO cor-
relates with sleep amount, whereas the activity of GABA-
ergic neurons in MnPO correlates with homeostatic sleep
pressure or propensity. 53 Importantly, activity of the VLPO
during sleep is correlated with inhibition of other arousal
centers in the brainstem and hypothalamus.51,54 Given
its potentially central role as a mediator of sleep, VLPO
became an attractive candidate as a mediator of anesthetic-
induced unconsciousness. Nelson and colleagues demon-
strated activation of VLPO after systemic administration of
propofol or pentothal 55; recent studies have examined the
mechanistic significance of these findings. Eikermann and
colleagues conducted studies of rats with chronic lesions of

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_004_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

9 • Consciousness, Memory, and Anesthesia 	253
VLPO, finding that ablation of VLPO resulted in sleep depri-
vation (as expected) but conferred increased sensitivity to the
effects of isoflurane. 56 This finding would argue against a
critical role of VLPO in the mechanism of anesthesia. How-
ever, Moore and colleagues demonstrated that acute lesions
of VLPO conferred resistance to the effects of isoflurane, an
effect that appeared to be mediated specifically through the
sleep-active neurons in VLPO.57 These neurons are actually
depolarized (i.e., activated) by isoflurane. Taken together,
these data suggest that VLPO plays a role in anesthetic-
induced unconsciousness (as evidenced by acute lesion
data), but that the effects of sleep deprivation associated
with chronic VLPO lesions could overwhelm this role. Curi-
ously, direct administration of dexmedetomidine, an α-2-
adrenergic agonist, to the VLPO can destabilize the state of
isoflurane anesthesia.58 !
Orexinergic neurons. Orexinergic neurons are found in
the lateral hypothalamus and provide an important arousal
stimulus for the cortex. There are two types of orexin (A and
B), which are also referred to as hypocretins. Orexinergic
neurons innervate other arousal centers in the brainstem
and basal forebrain, and fire maximally in the waking state,
are suppressed during NREM sleep, and show occasional
bursts during phasic REM sleep. 59,60 Dysfunction of the
orexinergic system is associated with narcolepsy in both
human and animal models.61,62 The often dramatic delay
of anesthetic emergence in narcoleptic patients 63 has moti-
vated the study of orexin in anesthetic mechanism. Orexins
attenuate the effects of isoflurane,64 propofol,65 ketamine,66
and barbiturates,67 using various measures. Local infusion
of orexin in the basal forebrain is associated with electro-
encephalographic (EEG) arousal and decreased emergence
time in animals anesthetized with sevoflurane68 and isoflu-
rane.69 Microinjection of propofol in the perifornical region
of the hypothalamus (the locus of orexinergic neurons) is
associated with a decrease in cortical acetylcholine, an
important mediator of arousal.70 Importantly, both genetic
and pharmacologic studies have demonstrated that orex-
ins play an important role in emergence from sevoflurane
and isoflurane anesthesia, but not induction.71 This semi-
nal study suggested that there is a distinct neurobiology of
induction and emergence, and formed the basis for a theory
of “neural inertia” across state transitions.72 Of note, halo-
thane did not show an effect on orexinergic neurons and
emergence time was not altered in orexin knockout mice.73
These findings have been confirmed for propofol anesthesia:
propofol reduces activity in orexinergic neurons in rats and
infusion of orexin in the basal forebrain affects emergence
time, but not induction time. 74 Orexins might facilitate
emergence from anesthesia through actions in the basal
forebrain.75!
Tuberomammillary nucleus. The TMN is located in the
caudal hypothalamus and is the brain’s source of hista-
mine, an arousal-promoting transmitter. TMN activity and
histamine levels are highest during wakefulness and lowest
during sleep; 76 the TMN is thought to have a relationship
of reciprocal inhibition with the sleep-promoting GABA-
ergic neurons of the VLPO. 51,54,77 Histamine release in the
anterior hypothalamus is depressed during sleep 78 and hal-
othane anesthesia.79 Systemic administration of propofol,
pentothal, and the GABA agonist muscimol all result in
decreased activity in the TMN.55 Microinjection of hista-
mine in the nucleus basalis magnocellularis of the basal
forebrain reverses the depressant effects of isoflurane on the
EEG, an effect likely mediated by H1 histamine receptors. 80
A recent study in which GABAA receptors were genetically
removed demonstrated that histaminergic neurons are
resistant to the effects of propofol. 81 However, at the behav-
ioral level, there was no effect of propofol on loss-of-righting
reflex, a surrogate for anesthetic-induced unconsciousness.
Thus the role of TMN and histaminergic transmission in the
mechanism of anesthesia is still unclear.!
ROLE OF THE THALAMUS
The thalamus is composed of more than 50 nuclei and
subnuclei that can be grossly classified as relays for sen-
sory input from the periphery or multimodal, integrative
regions that receive input from the cortex. Additionally,
the thalamus is critical for transmitting arousal signals
from the brainstem and for regulating cortical communi-
cation. The involvement of the thalamus in arousal, sen-
sory processing, and cortical computation is likely critical
for normal consciousness. As such, the thalamus has been
of continued interest to those investigating mechanisms of
anesthetic-induced unconsciousness.
The thalamus has been proposed as an ON/OFF switch
for anesthetic state transitions.82 This theory was gener-
ated based on the consistent metabolic depression of the
thalamus by a number of inhaled and intravenous anes-
thetics83-85 (with the exception of ketamine), 86 suggesting
that it could serve as an effective OFF switch. The hyperpo-
larization of the thalamus would shift tonic firing to burst
firing that—as with sleep—would prevent afferent sensory
stimuli from arousing the cortex. Importantly, however,
sensory nuclei in the thalamus (and their connectivity to
the cortex) appear to be less involved in anesthetic-induced
unconsciousness compared to the higher-order or “nonspe-
cific” nuclei.87,88
Evidence for the thalamus as an ON switch has been
derived primarily from animal experiments, in which
stimulation of the centromedial thalamus by either nico-
tine or antibodies blocking voltage-gated potassium chan-
nels could reverse the effects of inhaled anesthetics. 89,90
Although microinjection of large doses of nicotine into the
thalamus could precipitate anesthetic emergence, antago-
nism of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the same loca-
tion did not appear to contribute to anesthetic-induced
unconsciousness. Central thalamic activation results in
behavioral improvement in humans with traumatic brain
injury.91 A study in humans demonstrated that (spontane-
ous) activation of the thalamus along with other subcorti-
cal structures is correlated with recovery from anesthesia,
suggesting the involvement of the thalamus in the primitive
or “core” consciousness observed at emergence.92
Nonspecific nuclei of the thalamus have been proposed
as a computational blackboard for the cortex. 93 Thus if the
mechanism of anesthetic-induced unconsciousness was
achieved primarily by a suppression of cortical computa-
tion, a depressed thalamus should be the result. To address
this question, Velly and colleagues conducted a neurophys-
iologic study using scalp EEG (reflecting cortical signals)

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_005_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	254
and subthalamic nuclei electrodes (argued to reflect tha-
lamic activity). 94 Induction of anesthesia with either propo-
fol or sevoflurane was associated with cortical rather than
subcortical changes, suggesting that the depression of the
thalamus identified through neuroimaging studies reflected
an effect rather than a cause of anesthetic-induced uncon-
sciousness. Other case studies in humans suggest concur-
rent suppression of thalamus and cortex during induction
of propofol. 95 Furthermore, more precise neurophysiologic
recordings of thalamus and cortex in animal models sug-
gest that effects of propofol on central thalamic activity
precede effects on the cortex; interestingly this was found
during the spontaneous induction of sleep as well.96 Other
animal studies have found that attenuation of high-fre-
quency oscillations by propofol is more pronounced in the
thalamus than the cortex.97
The prior two possibilities (thalamic switch or compu-
tational blackboard for the cortex) treat the thalamus as a
passive player in general anesthesia. However, more recent
data suggest that it might, instead, play an active role. A
computational study using human EEG data and modeling
suggested that the action of propofol on GABA receptors
in the nucleus reticularis generates a hypersynchronous
alpha rhythm (8-13 Hz) with the frontal cortex that blocks
sensory input.98 Hypersynchrony of alpha may block the
flexible corticocortical communication required for normal
consciousness.99 A recent animal study identified alpha
synchronization between thalamus and medial prefrontal
cortex during propofol induction. 100 The potential role of
thalamocortical interactions in anesthetic-induced uncon-
sciousness prompts further discussion of the thalamus and
its connectivity to the cortex.!
CORTICAL-SUBCORTICAL CONNECTIVITY
The closely integrated function of the cortex and thala-
mus suggests that the two can be treated as a single thala-
mocortical system. The thalamocortical system undergoes
state-dependent changes across the sleep-wake cycle, and
is thought to play a critical role in consciousness. This role
is defined by its ability to integrate the activities of function-
ally diverse cognitive modules, a property that is critical for
subjective experience.101
Recent studies using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) have refined the role of thalamocortical
connectivity in anesthesia. One study identified a propofol-
induced disruption of connectivity between the thalamus
and lateral frontal-parietal networks.102 Similarly, a study
of the specific nuclei (linked to particular sensory modali-
ties) and nonspecific nuclei (linked to integrative functions)
found that disrupted connectivity between the nonspecific
nuclei and the cortex best accounted for a reduction in the
level of consciousness by propofol.87 Recently, the inhaled
anesthetic sevoflurane has been shown to functionally
disconnect the thalamus and cortex, especially frontal cor-
tex.103,104 Notably, a consistent finding of neuroimaging
studies is that the thalamocortical connectivity of primary
sensory networks is relatively well preserved despite anes-
thetic-induced unconsciousness.
The finding of impaired thalamocortical connectivity in
association with anesthetic-induced unconsciousness has
not been universal. An fMRI study of propofol revealed more
profound functional disconnections between the cortex and
putamen, a subcortical structure in the basal ganglia. 105
In contrast, thalamic connectivity was relatively well pre-
served. The potential role of the striatum (composed of the
putamen and caudate) in anesthetic-induced unconscious-
ness has been demonstrated in a study of rats undergoing
isoflurane anesthesia.106 This study was conducted with
fMRI and found that the functional connection between the
frontal cortex and the basal ganglia was disrupted during
general anesthesia. A functional disconnection of associa-
tion cortex and subcortical structures has also been shown
by fMRI in a study of propofol-induced unconsciousness in
humans.107 With improved spatial resolution of 7T fMRI
machines and templates for brainstem nuclei,108 future
studies can focus on identifying with greater precision the
critical subcortical and cortical interactions or functional
disconnections 	that 	contribute 	to 	anesthetic-induced
unconsciousness.109!
CORTICAL CONNECTIVITY AND DYNAMICS
The last three sections were organized according to a bot-
tom-up approach to consciousness and anesthesia, starting
with the brainstem, and then moving to the diencepha-
lon and thalamocortical system. Sleep is clearly generated
through such bottom-up mechanisms 14; however, anes-
thetics may suppress the level of consciousness through bot-
tom-up mechanisms and content of consciousness through
top-down (i.e., cortical) mechanisms.12
Early 	studies 	using 	positron 	emission 	tomography
(PET) demonstrated regional depression in cortical areas,
including lateral and medial frontal-parietal networks.110
Disruption of fMRI-based functional connectivity in fron-
tal-parietal networks has been demonstrated during anes-
thetic-induced unconsciousness induced by drugs with
distinct molecular mechanisms, including propofol, 102,111
sevoflurane,103 and ketamine.112 However, the cortex
is amenable not only to fMRI but also neurophysiologi-
cal techniques of assessing connectivity, enabling data on
anesthetic-induced unconsciousness with improved tempo-
ral resolution. EEG can be used to measure functional con-
nectivity (the statistical covariation of the activities of brain
regions), and directional or effective connectivity (the pre-
sumed causal influence of one brain region on another).113
Using such techniques applied to EEG (in some cases with
concomitant fMRI), disruption of frontal-parietal connectiv-
ity and surrogates of information exchange in humans has
been consistently observed after administration of a variety
of anesthetics with diverse molecular targets.104,114-117 It
has been suggested that such disruption of frontal-parietal
connectivity, with implications for impaired information
transfer of relevance to consciousness, might be a com-
mon mediator and proximate cause of anesthetic-induced
unconsciousness.118
The inhibition of frontal-parietal communication is
likely representative of a more global disruption of corti-
cal communication. A study using high-density EEG and
transcranial magnetic stimulation revealed an inhibition
of cortical-effective connectivity after midazolam-induced
unconsciousness. 119 After administration of the benzodi-
azepine, local cortical activation could be observed at the
site of magnetic stimulation, but robust evoked potentials

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_006_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

9 • Consciousness, Memory, and Anesthesia 	255
were terminated at less than 100 milliseconds, and cor-
tical communication was limited. Of note, this finding is
consistent with findings in NREM sleep. 120 This perturba-
tional approach determined that the complexity of corti-
cal response to a stimulus decreased during sleep, general
anesthesia, and disorders of consciousness. 121 The con-
cordant findings across physiologic (sleep) and pharma-
cologic (anesthesia) states of unconsciousness may reflect
a common neurophysiologic mechanism of disrupted cor-
tical connectivity through slow oscillations, which share
a number of characteristics in NREM sleep and general
anesthesia. 122 A study of three epilepsy patients with
intracranial 	neurophysiologic 	monitoring 123 	revealed
that, within 5 seconds of propofol-induced unconscious-
ness, there was a dramatic increase in the power of slow
oscillations. Although single-unit neuronal activity was
initially suppressed, it returned to baseline (or above base-
line) but was fragmented into highly active and quiescent
periods. Neural firing became coupled with the slow oscil-
lation. However, the slow oscillations themselves demon-
strated decay in phase coupling with increased distance
across the cortex. Thus neuronal spike activity became
fragmented into “on” and “off” periods, which became
temporally uncoordinated across the cortex. These neuro-
physiologic conditions dramatically reduce the probability
of meaningful corticocortical communication.
More recent trends of analyzing cortical changes dur-
ing states of unconsciousness take a dynamic approach
that reflects not just connectivity configurations but
the repertoire of states that can be accessed during gen-
eral anesthesia. For example, there is a contraction of
dynamic repertoire and neural signal diversity during
propofol-induced unconsciousness 124,125 that would pre-
clude the kind of flexibility required for normal conscious
experience. Dynamic patterns are impaired during general
anesthesia and cortical dynamics are stabilized during gen-
eral anesthesia. 126 This is likely a discrete, multistage pro-
cess with distinct dynamic signatures during sedation and
general anesthesia (Fig. 9.3).127,128 Relating dynamics to
connectivity, it appears that the repertoire of functional
connectivity patterns in the primate brain becomes more
tethered to structural/anatomical connectivity patterns
during the anesthetized state.129 Of note, animal studies
suggest that the return of consciousness after general anes-
thesia is defined by discrete neural states that reconfigure
during emergence.130
In the next section, we discuss memory, the thread that
links conscious experiences together to form the narrative
of “self.”!
Memory
HISTORY AND TERMINOLOGY
Modern understanding of the structure, function, and
organization of human memory is deeply informed by
the study of amnesia. The most renowned demonstration
of this principle occurred in 1957, when Brenda Milner
reported the remarkable case of Henry Gustav Molaison
(1926–2008),131 an amnesiac who would become known
famously as H.M., and who would represent the single most
influential case study in the history of neuroscience. In a
procedure intended to treat a refractory seizure disorder,
Neuronal
Synchronization/
Temporal
Autocorrelation
Wakefulness 	Sedation 	Anesthesia & DOC
Voxel level
(0.5-1 million neurons/voxel)
Regional level
(40-60 voxels/area)
Network level
10-60 functional areas/network
Regional
Connectivity
Long-Range
Connectivity
Fig. 9.3 Schematic summary of the consecutive stages of unconsciousness. Relative to the control state of wakefulness (left column), sedation (middle
panel) is marked by an increase of local/regional signal synchrony and consequent breakdown of global connectivity. Deep surgical anesthesia or
disorders of consciousness (DOC, right column) is associated with collapse of both local/regional synchrony and global connectivity. (From Huang Z,
Liu X, Mashour GA, Hudetz AG. Timescales of intrinsic BOLD signal dynamics and functional connectivity in pharmacologic and neuropathologic states of
unconsciousness. J Neurosci. 2018;38[9]:2304–2317.)

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_007_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	256
significant portions of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) were
removed bilaterally—including the hippocampus, amyg-
dala, and adjacent parahippocampal gyrus. H.M. developed
profound and enduring anterograde amnesia, and was
unable to establish any new conscious memory, irrespec-
tive of the sensory modality. He also developed a temporally
graded window of retrograde amnesia, with impaired recall
of events occurring during the 3 years preceding his sur-
gery. However, most of his associated cognitive functions—
perceptual processing, language, attention, access to
semantic knowledge, and capacity to retain small packages
of information in constant rehearsal—remained largely
or entirely intact. Prior to this report, the prevailing the-
ory—articulated by Canadian neuropsychologist Donald
Hebb132—was that there was no brain region dedicated to
memory function. Instead, memory processes were thought
to be distributed and integrated into region-specific percep-
tual and cognitive functions. For example, the visual attri-
bute of a memory would be wholly served within the striate
and extrastriate cortical regions responsible for visual per-
ception. The description of H.M. immediately disproved this
model. It became clear that the MTL was a specialized and
obligatory structure for the establishment and early mainte-
nance of all conscious memory, irrespective of the modality.
The trajectory of memory research was profoundly trans-
formed. Initially, largely independent branches evolved to
focus on the structural-functional organization of the MTL
(Fig. 9.4A) and the nature of cellular-level neuroplastic
processes—the latter notably marked by the description of
long-term potentiation (LTP) by Timothy Bliss and Terje
Lømo in 1973.133 Subsequently, emerging technologies
enabled the development and investigation of systems-level
constructs. Examples include the use of EEG and magne-
toencephalography to assess the role of oscillatory phase
synchronization in neuronal assemblies,134 fMRI to identify
large-scale networks associated with specific memory func-
tions,135 and machine learning to classify complex neural
network patterns predictive of memory.136
Amnesia is the term used to describe one of the cardinal
properties of general anesthesia. As understood by most
anesthesiologists and laypeople, this description is phenom-
enological; it states that patients do not recall the events
that occur to them while receiving anesthesia. However,
this usage confuses a critical mechanistic and semantic
distinction. Patients in the deepest states of anesthesia are
unable to process and bind perceptual elements into an
integrated conscious experience. From the perspective of
cognitive neuroscience, the “amnesia” of general anesthe-
sia is not a primary failure of memory, but rather a failure of
consciousness. It simply reflects that a conscious experience
cannot be reconstructed by memory processes when it does
not exist in the first place. Further confusion is added by the
frequent use of the term awareness—a synonym for con-
scious perception—to describe the case in which a patient
consciously recalls events occurring during the admin-
istration of an anesthetic. This ignores the fundamental
principle that memory is functionally dissociable from con-
sciousness. Awareness is necessary for the establishment of
memory under anesthesia, but it is not sufficient. Conscious
recall can occur only if awareness is accompanied by mem-
ory processes in the MTL and elsewhere that establish and
preserve a representation that can be reconstructed later.
These important distinctions establish the axiom that
patients who form memories while under anesthesia can-
not have been truly unconscious; they must have possessed
some conscious substrate from which the memory derives.
However, the converse inference is not always true: the exis-
tence of consciousness will not necessarily lead to the exis-
tence of memory if an anesthetic drug is present. Evidence
to support this statement is unambiguously encountered in
everyday anesthetic practice—patients receiving a small
dose of propofol or midazolam who engage in a cogent con-
versation that they are later unable to recall, or in patients
emerging from general anesthesia who follow commands
to demonstrate that extubation can proceed safely, yet later
cannot recall anything related to this clearly conscious
event. Anesthetic drugs must therefore have direct effects
on memory processes that are dissociable from those on
consciousness—and it is this observation that provides a
framework for the systematic study of how anesthetic drugs
affect memory.!
Organization and Function of
Normal Memory
MULTIPLE MEMORY SYSTEMS
When the term memory is used in everyday language, it
almost always refers to declarative memory. Declarative
memory is the representation of prior events and knowl-
edge that is accessible to consciousness and can be manipu-
lated by attention and executive function. It is the form of
memory referred to in the context of anesthetic amnesia.
Further important organizational structure exists within
declarative memory. The first is the distinction between epi-
sodic and semantic memory. Episodic memory is the recollec-
tion of events with a clear spatiotemporal context (as when
recalling autobiographical events with a distinct sense of
personal experience, time, and place), whereas semantic
memory is the capacity to recall and apply meaning, facts,
and knowledge without spatiotemporal context (as when
recalling that Mount Everest is the tallest mountain in the
world without any sense of time and place for the acqui-
sition of that knowledge). The episodic memory system is
fast-mapping and highly dependent on the MTL as well as
frontal and parietal structures,137,138 whereas the semantic
memory system is slower and involves distributed cortical
regions that closely map to the default mode network, a
large-scale system that is active during the resting state and
flow of spontaneous cognition. 135,139 The second organiza-
tional structure within episodic memory is the distinction
between recollection and familiarity. Recollection involves
remembering specific qualitative contextual details about
a prior event, whereas in a familiarity judgment, there is a
sense that an item has been encountered previously, but
beyond that there are no added contextual details. The
accepted understanding is that recollection and familiarity
arise from distinct processes and neural architecture within
the MTL. The perirhinal cortex receives input from sen-
sory association areas and supports familiarity judgments
through encoding and retrieval of the identifying qualities
of an item (the “what” information). The parahippocam-
pal cortex and entorhinal areas receive input from areas

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_008_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

9 • Consciousness, Memory, and Anesthesia 	257
processing spatial information (the “where” information),
and support recollection through encoding and retrieval
of context. The hippocampus links these two, binding item
and context information, and appears necessary for recol-
lection, but plays little or no role in familiarity.140,141
Other forms of memory are dissociable from declarative
memory. Findings that amnesiacs could learn a hand-eye
coordination skill even while possessing no memory of the
task led to the distinction between declarative and proce-
dural memory, which is dependent on the caudate nucleus.
Prefrontal cortext 	Cingulum
Anterior thalamic
nuclei
MTT
Mammillary bodies
Septal
nuclei 	Fornix
Amygdala
Subiculum
Hippocampus
Entorhinal cortex
Perirhinal
cortex
LA
A
B
ICM L
ICM MD
ICMMV
BA
Brainstem
(fear effector neurons)
CeL 	CeM
Parahippocampal
cortex
Neocortical association areas including
frontal and parietal areas
Retrosplenial
cortex
EC
DG 	CA3 	CA1
Perforant path
Mossy
fibres
Schaffer
collaterals
To
subiculum
Glutamatergic
GABA-ergic
Cornu ammonis
Medial thalamic
nuclei
Fig. 9.4 Memory systems in the medial temporal lobe. (A) Representation of unidirectional and bidirectional network connectivity of structures in
the medial temporal lobe, diencephalic nuclei, and neocortical association areas. CA, Cornu ammonis; DG, dentate gyrus; EC, entorhinal cortex; MTT,
mammillothalamic tract. (B) Intrinsic connectivity of the amygdala. BA, Basal nucleus; CeL, central nucleus lateral segment; CeM, central nucleus medial
segment; ICML, lateral intercalated cell mass; ICMMD, dorsomedial intercalated cell mass; ICMMV, ventromedial intercalated cell mass; LA, lateral nucleus.
([A] Modified from Bartsch T, Butler C. Transient amnesic syndromes. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013;9[2]:86–97, Figure 2. [B] Modified from Duvarci S, Pare D. Amygdala
microcircuits controlling learned fear. Neuron. 2014;82[5]:966–980, Figure 2.)

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_009_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	258
Subsequently, memory-impaired patients were also found
to have intact priming, 142 which is a nonconscious process
in which exposure to a stimulus influences the response to a
later stimulus—for example, amnesiacs can name pictures
100 milliseconds faster if they have seen them previously,
despite having no declarative memory of the exposure.143
The neural bases for priming effects are thought to arise
within regions serving perceptual and contextual process-
ing of the stimulus, and so vary with the nature of the
task.144 Lastly, a large body of work has extensively eluci-
dated the emotional memory system. The classic experimen-
tal model is Pavlovian fear conditioning and its variants,
wherein an emotionally neutral conditioned stimulus is
paired with an aversive unconditioned stimulus, leading
to an involuntary associative physiologic and/or behav-
ioral response to the conditioned stimulus. The circuitry
involves convergence of afferent information from all sen-
sory modalities on the lateral nucleus of the amygdala,
and the basolateral and central nuclei projecting widely to
modulate processes in cortical and subcortical regions (see
Fig. 9. 4B).145,146 With the progressive description of these
and other functional distinctions, the framework for under-
standing memory eventually shifted to models that con-
tained multiple memory systems in the brain, distributed
functionally and anatomically.147
Working memory refers to the capacity to maintain lim-
ited amounts of information in the stream of consciousness,
which can be manipulated to perform complex cognitive
tasks such as reasoning, comprehension, and learning.148
The concept evolved from, and has largely replaced, earlier
ideas about short-term memory, but the terms should not be
used interchangeably, as working memory implies both a
short-term memory store and the capacity for manipula-
tion. The most influential current model, first proposed by
Baddeley and Hitch in 1974,149 divides working memory
into capacity-limited component subsystems: a phonological
loop that maintains information through vocal or subvocal
rehearsal, such as when one holds a telephone number in
mind; a visuospatial sketchpad, which holds and manipulates
spatial, visual, and kinesthetic information; and a central
executive, which is responsible for regulating selective atten-
tion and inhibition. A fourth subsystem, the episodic buffer,
was later added to the model150 and is responsible for the
temporary storage of multidimensional representations and
integration with declarative memory.
Working memory has long been understood to not involve
the MTL,151 although the belief that it has no role has recently
been questioned in studies of spatial working memory.152
Notwithstanding, current understanding of working mem-
ory suggests that it is served by persistent activity and flexible
resource allocation in a distributed cortical network, with a
critical hub in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)
interconnected with parietal cortex, thalamus, caudate, and
globus pallidus.153 The functional and structural distinc-
tion between working memory and the MTL does not mean
that working memory and declarative memory systems
do not interact. Working memory depends on declarative
memory representations to provide semantic meaning and
context. During working memory tasks, cortical perceptual
areas associated with representations of declarative mem-
ory become activated and show increased synchrony with
prefrontal regions.154 Reciprocally, encoding of declarative
memory is strongly influenced by the nature of processing
occurring in working memory, with deeper levels of execu-
tive processing resulting in better learning.155
The transition of memory from short-term stores through
to stable long-term stores is experienced as continuous and
was assumed to reflect sequential transfer across systems.
However, this model is challenged by rare case examples
of patients who have a selective short-term memory deficit
but intact declarative memory function, and recent studies
have reinforced the view that memories are formed in mul-
tiple systems in parallel.156!
LONG-TERM POTENTIATION, SYNAPTIC
TAGGING, AND THE CONSOLIDATION MODEL
OF MEMORY
The consolidation hypothesis of memory was first pro-
posed by Müller and Pilzecker in 1900.157 They noted that
memory for new information could be disrupted by learn-
ing other information shortly after the initial training. This
effect, called retroactive interference, is temporally graded
such that the susceptibility of the memory is greatest imme-
diately after learning and decreases with time. Müller and
Pilzecker proposed that the memory trace must initially
exist in a fragile state, but subsequently becomes stable
through the process of consolidation. The consolidation
hypothesis remains the framework for understanding the
temporal course of memory processes and behavior.
For a memory trace to be consolidated, it must of course
be created. The term used to describe this process is encoding.
Encoding implies that the networks mediating the neural
representation of an event as it is experienced do not immedi-
ately return to their previous state and are modified in such a
way that potentiates reactivation of that representation. The
synaptic plasticity and memory hypothesis states that activity-
induced synaptic plasticity is both necessary and sufficient for
the information storage underlying memory,158 and within
this framework encoding implies that some form of synaptic
plasticity has been initiated. However, encoding cannot in
itself assure the propagation of a memory trace. Encoding cre-
ates the potential for the formation of a long-term memory.
The minimal events that constitute the neural correlates
of encoding are incompletely understood. Cellular models
demonstrate that functional changes in synaptic strength
can occur in the absence of any structural change in den-
dritic spines.159 The perpetuation of these initial changes
through structural and functional remodeling represents the
neural correlate of memory consolidation. The prevailing
cellular model for this is LTP,160 which describes a durable
increase in synaptic transmission efficiency following a stim-
ulation protocol. It is now recognized that LTP occurs richly
throughout the hippocampus, as well as in other afferent
pathways.161 LTP can be induced by nonphysiologic high-
frequency stimulation, but also by stimulation protocols
that resemble physiologic activity, the most important being
bursts in the theta range (4-8 Hz).162 This is of notable rele-
vance to memory, as synchronized hippocampal theta oscil-
lations appear critical to successful memory behaviors.134
The breadth and depth of literature on the mecha-
nisms of LTP are far too voluminous to summarize here.
Nonetheless, certain principles are essential and relevant
to anesthesia studies and can be stated succinctly. The
induction of most forms of LTP requires activation of post-
synaptic 	N-methyl-D-aspartate 	(NMDA) 	receptors, 163

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_010_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

9 • Consciousness, Memory, and Anesthesia 	259
followed by influx of Na + and Ca 2+ . This rise in intracel-
lular Ca 2+ is the critical trigger for LTP. Calcium-calmod-
ulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII) is then activated and
autophosphorylated, 164,165 leading to cytoskeletal recon-
figuration. 166 Activation of several other cell-signaling
cascades also contribute to LTP. The terminal expression
of LTP is protein synthesis, occurring in both the soma
and local dendrites, and resulting in enduring structural
changes at the synapse. 167 Protein synthesis inhibitors
have been demonstrated to consistently prevent sustained
LTP in!vitro and learning in!vivo. 168
LTP thus proceeds in two phases: early LTP (E-LTP) is
independent of protein synthesis and can be sustained
across an interval of minutes to a short number of hours,
while late LTP (L-LTP) is dependent on intracellular sig-
naling and protein synthesis and can be sustained across
many days. The synaptic tagging and capture hypothesis
provides a mechanistic explanation for the observation
that the persistence of synaptic potentiation (and mem-
ory) is influenced by events surrounding encoding. 169
In this model, synapses activated during E-LTP become
tagged via a protein synthesis-independent mechanism.
This tag establishes the potential for sustained L-LTP,
but for the cascade to continue the tags must capture
plasticity-related proteins (PRPs) synthesized in the soma
or dendrites in response to neural activity. The synaptic
tagging model explains how the thousands of dendrites of
a single neuron can be engaged in memory stabilization
processes in various states of evolution, because the tag-
ging and PRP capture need not occur as a singular event.!
RECONSOLIDATION
A major shift the in understanding of consolidation
occurred in 2000, when Nader et al. reported that an old
memory for auditory fear conditioning, which would nor-
mally not be sensitive to protein inhibitors, can be made
newly sensitive if it is retrieved. 170 The implication is that
retrieval of a memory renders it transiently plastic, after
which it restabilizes. This process is termed reconsolidation,
and the period of plasticity is termed the reconsolidation
window. The mechanism shares many of the LTP pro-
cesses that are associated with initial consolidation, but
also has features that are quite distinct at both the cellular
and systems level. 171 Reconsolidation serves as a modu-
latory process that enables the strengthening of an exist-
ing memory, but it is also clear that it provides a window
within which an existing memory is malleable and can be
updated with the addition of novel information, or dimin-
ished through interruption of restabilization processes. 172
These latter properties have generated significant transla-
tional interest because of repeated demonstrations of the
ability to modify or even eliminate fear memory in animals
through pharmacologic and behavioral interventions that
interrupt reconsolidation. 173 Indeed, the erasure of fear
memory in humans can be demonstrated through per-
formance of a behavioral extinction procedure during the
reconsolidation window. 174 !
PHASE SYNCHRONIZATION AND COUPLING
The neurons in assemblies and networks undergo oscilla-
tory activation and inhibition. Phase synchronization of
these oscillations supports neural communication by creat-
ing transient and dynamic associations between different
functional brain regions. Phase synchronization appears
to be fundamental to neural plasticity and memory,134
and numerous studies have demonstrated that dynam-
ics of synchrony during memory tasks can be related to
both long-term175 and working memory176 performance.
Gamma-band (30-100 Hz) synchrony is believed to sup-
port an important form of Hebbian plasticity, termed spike-
timing-dependent plasticity, in the hippocampus. Both
computational models and experimental data provide evi-
dence that rapid changes in the frequency and phase of
gamma rhythms modulate this form of plasticity through
coordination of presynaptic spikes in assemblies of neurons,
effectively classifying which assemblies are interpreted as a
single event.177
Another property of relevance to memory coding is the
coupling of gamma oscillations to the phase of slower, syn-
chronized oscillations within the theta-band (4-8 Hz). 178
Theta oscillations, which are prominent in the hippo-
campus and entorhinal cortex, undergo phase resetting
in response to a stimulus. The phase reset involves widely
distributed regions, and is thought to serve as an efficient
mechanism for the optimization of interregional communi-
cation.179 Theta phase resetting and synchrony in the hip-
pocampal-entorhinal system are implicated in declarative
memory,180 and in the amygdala-hippocampal system in
fear-based memory.181 Coupling between theta phase and
gamma amplitude is connected to declarative memory for-
mation,180,182 and, in an elegant model, is proposed to form
a code for representing multiple items and spatial represen-
tations in an ordered way.183 Coupling between theta phase
and gamma phase enables a more precise temporal coordi-
nation of neuronal spikes, and may code for separated rep-
resentations of multiple items in working memory.184!
Effects of Anesthetic Drugs on
Declarative Memory Function in
Humans
There are multiple potential pathways by which anesthetic
drugs could interfere with memory and cause amnesia.
Most of these cannot be directly assessed in humans, but
the plausibility of candidate mechanisms can be indirectly
examined by designing experiments that are informed by
the characteristics of known memory processes. Studies of
anesthetic effects on memory are most informative when
conceptualized and designed with reference to robust meth-
ods and findings taken from the larger body of memory
research.
BEHAVIORAL STUDIES OF RETROGRADE
MEMORY EFFECTS
Notwithstanding some isolated case reports, systematic inves-
tigations have found no evidence that anesthetic drugs cause
retrograde amnesia in humans. There is no retrograde amne-
sia associated with induction doses of thiopental,185 metho-
hexital,185 or propofol.186 Adult patients have normal memory
for visual stimuli presented 4 minutes before administration of
midazolam at doses of 2, 5, and 10 mg.187 Similarly, memory is

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_011_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	260
normal for word lists learned in the preoperative holding area
or operating room immediately before induction.188 Studies
in pediatric patients have shown normal memory for pictures
presented immediately before sedation with midazolam,189
propofol,190 and dexmedetomidine.191 In controlled labora-
tory settings using human volunteers and target-controlled
infusions, studies have found no impairment of memory for
pictures192 or words193,194 presented before sedative infusions
of propofol, midazolam, thiopental, or dexmedetomidine.
There is some evidence from controlled studies that anes-
thetic drugs may instead lead to the opposite effect, in which
memory for material presented prior to drug administration
is enhanced—a phenomenon termed retrograde facilitation.
In one study using a mildly sedative dose of propofol,195
memory for words learned immediately prior to drug admin-
istration was enhanced throughout the testing period of 24
hours. Similar effects are described for midazolam and other
benzodiazepines in the psychopharmacology literature.196
The mechanistic explanation for retrograde facilitation can
be framed by an understanding of retrograde interference—the
observation that mental exertion inhibits the consolidation of
recently formed memories, with the newest memories being
most vulnerable.197 The induction of new LTP interferes
with recently formed LTP and memory performance, even
when the tasks are unrelated.198 However, when the induc-
tion of new LTP is blocked by administration of a selective
NMDA antagonist after learning, interference with recently
formed LTP does not occur, and memory performance
improves.199,200 A parsimonious explanation for the retro-
grade facilitation seen with propofol and benzodiazepines is
that they similarly modulate the induction of new LTP via
a GABA-ergic pathway, freeing consolidation resources that
enhance survival of recently formed memory.
The findings of retrograde facilitation and absence of ret-
rograde amnesia are suggestive that the key mechanisms of
GABA-ergic anesthetic amnesia, at least in humans, involve
very early processes in the consolidation cascade. It is more
difficult to rationalize that downstream sequences represent
principal targets. Were this the case, the expected effect
would be interference with ongoing consolidation of mem-
ory for events occurring in the past, creating a window of
retrograde amnesia. Nonetheless, an alternate model to the
induction hypothesis suggests that GABA-ergic anesthetics
exert a direct effect on downstream protein transcription
processes,201 based on evidence from rodent studies.202
The absence of pharmacologic retrograde amnesia does
not dismiss the repeated finding that, in the clinical set-
ting, a percentage of patients will not recall the immediate
preanesthetic period—an effect that increases with age. 203
Although not systematically studied, the complex norad-
renergic-mediated effects of acute stress and anxiety on
memory may be contributory.204!
MATHEMATICAL MODELING OF ANESTHETIC
AMNESIA
Mathematical modeling of memory decay has been used to
characterize the amnestic effects of multiple intravenous
anesthetic drugs,193 which are accurately described by a
two-parameter power decay function:
mt = λt − Ψ
where λ reflects the initial memory strength (an index
of encoding), and ψ expresses the rate of decay (an index
of consolidation). The drugs are characterized by marked
differences in the way they modulate the two coefficients.
Propofol is an archetypal amnestic drug—it permits robust
encoding of material, but the information undergoes acceler-
ated decay because of a failure of consolidation. In contrast,
dexmedetomidine archetypally causes memory impairment
because of a failure of information to be strongly encoded
but has little or no effect on the subsequent consolidation of
memories that are encoded. The benzodiazepine midazolam
behaves like propofol at lower doses—selectively causing
consolidation failure while leaving encoding intact—but
with increasing dose a significant encoding impairment
emerges. Thiopental in contrast causes marked encoding
failure but demonstrates minimal effect on consolidation.
The discrepant patterns observed imply that nonspecific
GABA A agonism is not per se sufficient to explain the ability
of a drug to cause consolidation failure.!
ANESTHETIC EFFECTS ON ATTENTION AND
AROUSAL AS MODULATORS OF ENCODING
The effect of anesthetic drugs on encoding processes is
related to the modulation of attention. Selective attention
is governed by distinct networks mediating alertness, target
orientation, and executive control205; involves modulation
of neuronal phase synchrony across short- and long-range
connections206; and is necessary for the successful estab-
lishment of declarative memory.207 The dominant effect
of most anesthetic drugs on attention is decreased arousal,
with the notable exception being the NMDA antagonist
ketamine, which has dominant effects on orienting and
selection.208 Thiopental mimics the effect of an attentional
challenge task in decreasing activation in the left inferior
prefrontal cortex (LIPFC), an effect that is not seen with
propofol.209 When tested at 225 minutes, arousal is predic-
tive of memory for thiopental and dexmedetomidine, while
propofol causes a significantly greater loss of memory than
would be predicted by modulation of arousal alone.194 In
mathematical modeling of anesthetic amnesia,193 arousal
predicts the coefficient of encoding strength with precision
for a range of sedative concentrations of dexmedetomidine,
thiopental, midazolam, and propofol. In sum, arousal is pre-
dictive of subsequent memory for drugs that impair mem-
ory dominantly through causing encoding failure.!
NEUROIMAGING STUDIES OF CORTICAL
ENCODING PROCESSES
A limited number of functional neuroimaging studies have
evaluated the effect of anesthetics on cortical regional acti-
vation during memory encoding. An early PET study inves-
tigating sedative doses of propofol using a word memory
task210 identified that activation in LIPFC—a region associ-
ated with encoding and subsequent memory for language
tasks—was conserved, suggesting that propofol did not
block the processes required to support successful encoding.
In contrast, activation in DLPFC—a region most associated
with executive control functions and cognitive control of
motor planning211—was decreased. In a subsequent investi-
gation using an auditory depth of processing task, activation

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_012_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

9 • Consciousness, Memory, and Anesthesia 	261
of LIPFC was found to be decreased by sedative doses of thio-
pental, but again was relatively unaffected by propofol.209
However, other studies have identified decreased activa-
tion in encoding areas. An fMRI study of sentence com-
prehension during light sedation with propofol found that
decreased memory for sentences was related to decreased
activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG, within the
LIPFC) and the middle temporal gyrus.212 Another study
using a single-word encoding task showed decreased activa-
tion in LIFG at levels of propofol sedation causing memory
loss, but also found intact connectivity between LIFG and
a number of frontoparietal and temporal regions associated
with verbal processing and memory tasks, including the
middle temporal gyrus and precuneus.213
Some functional neuroimaging studies have used experi-
mental tasks similar to memory encoding tasks while
evaluating sedative doses of anesthetic drugs, but have not
assessed memory encoding as a primary aim; these are infor-
mative, but must be interpreted with caution. An early PET
study of sedative doses of midazolam using a tone detection
paradigm reported a dose-dependent activation decrease in
Brodmann areas 9, 10, and 46, which overlap regions of
both DLPFC and LIPFC.214 An fMRI study of semantic word
processing during propofol sedation found a dose-dependent
decrease in activation of the LIFG, despite intact behavioral
responses.215 An fMRI study of low-dose dexmedetomidine
reported a generalized suppression of bilateral prefrontal
activation in Brodmann areas 9 and 10 during an emotional
picture memory task, but encoding performance was not
specifically analyzed.216 A recent study using music stimuli
found decreased activation in primary and secondary audi-
tory processing areas at sedative doses of dexmedetomidine
and midazolam, but not with propofol.217 Other neuroim-
aging studies evaluating resting state networks, or passive
activation in response to stimuli at nonresponsive levels of
sedation, should not be viewed as memory experiments.
Neuroimaging Studies of Medial Temporal Lobe
Function
Two methodologically similar studies used event-related
fMRI to evaluate MTL activation during low-dose infusions
of propofol and dexmedetomidine. The degree of amne-
sia caused by propofol can be linearly related to decreased
activation in the hippocampus bilaterally,218 an effect that
behaviorally corresponded to a failure of consolidation pro-
cesses. In contrast, dexmedetomidine does not reduce the
overall level of hippocampal activity, but the subsequent-
memory effect is attenuated, and dynamics of hippocampal
activation are less predictive of subsequent memory216;
one interpretation is that this reflects a downstream effect
from weakened cortical encoding processes. An earlier
study of the benzodiazepine lorazepam and the choliner-
gic antagonist scopolamine found decreased memory to be
correlated with decreased activation in the anterior hip-
pocampus, 219 accompanied by decreased activation in the
encoding-related regions in the fusiform gyrus and inferior
frontal cortex. In a largely exploratory investigation, 0.25%
sevoflurane was found to reduce hippocampal activation in
response to auditory and visual stimuli, but no memory per-
formance was assessed.220
A few studies have evaluated anesthetic effects using
electrocorticography and depth electrodes implanted
in epileptic patients, but none have been dedicated to
memory function. One notable study evaluated the effects
of mildly sedative concentrations of propofol on hippo-
campal spectral coherence and power characteristics
at rest. 221 The main finding was a significant increase
in hippocampal-rhinal spontaneous coherence in the
delta-band, but minimal changes in other bands; cortico-
hippocampal coherence was not assessed.!
STUDIES OF CORTICAL EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS
A number of memory-dedicated studies have used the
event-related potential (ERP)—a small but stereotypic posi-
tive and negative signal fluctuation in the EEG time-locked
to a stimulus, and which can be isolated through summa-
tion over multiple (usually at least 50) identical trials. ERPs
are thought to emerge not because new oscillations are
induced, but because of a stimulus-induced phase resetting
of ongoing oscillations.222
An early ERP study223 of scopolamine, lorazepam, and
diphenhydramine suggested that drug-induced effects on
arousal and memory may be electrophysiologically dis-
sociable, although memory was not assessed directly.
Changes in the P1N1 and N1P2 early complexes, associ-
ated with arousal, were seen for all three drugs. However,
changes in later complexes associated with memory, nota-
bly the P3 and N2P3, were seen only with scopolamine and
lorazepam, and not with diphenhydramine, an antihista-
mine that causes sedation but not amnesia. This work is
extended by a series of studies evaluating intravenous anes-
thetics and using memory-specific experimental paradigms.
In a verbal memory task, propofol amnesia was associated
with decreased P300 amplitude at the time of the encod-
ing task.224 In a subsequent study in which multiple drugs
were carefully dosed to equivalent levels of sedation,225
the true amnestic drugs with memory effects independent
of sedation—propofol and midazolam—caused decreased
amplitude in the P300 and N2P3 components, with the lat-
ter being the best predictor of subsequent memory perfor-
mance. Across all drugs studied, the N2 latency was related
to reaction time, a surrogate measure of sedation.
Another study examined early- and mid-latency ERPs
originating from the midline parietal precuneal region
(Pz), and related them to coefficients describing the extent
of encoding and consolidation failure.226 Across drugs
from multiple classes and at multiple doses, consolida-
tion failure was closely correlated with the P2 amplitude
and N2 latency observed at the time of encoding. As the
visual P2N2 complex is known to originate from synchro-
nous theta oscillations, 227 one possibility is that a common
mechanism underlying the effect of anesthetic drugs on
consolidation involves changes in theta oscillations across
a distributed cortico-hippocampal network occurring at
the time of consolidation induction. Further, the P2N2 and
memory decay coefficient were also closely correlated with
reaction time, which can be related to interregional syn-
chrony.228 Unfortunately, no direct measures of cortico-
hippocampal theta synchrony have yet been performed
in studies of pharmacologic amnesia. Another analysis229
examined the old-new effect, a robust phenomenon in the
parietal ERP that distinguishes the response to initial item

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_013_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	262
exposure from subsequent exposures as a marker of mem-
ory strength. Propofol and midazolam caused a significant
decrease in the old-new effect at 27 seconds, even though
memory performance was maintained, demonstrating
again an early marker of impaired memory processes that
precedes behavioral detection.
Studies using very different experimental paradigms have
evaluated auditory ERPs at multiple concentrations of propo-
fol.230,231 Propofol causes a dose-dependent decrease in mis-
match negativity and early right anterior negativity, which
are elicited in response to specific music signatures and are
known to relate to associative memory operations. In con-
trast, the P1 complex, which derives from primary auditory
processing, is not affected even at deep levels of sedation.!
Nonhuman Studies of Anesthetic
Effects on Memory Processes and
Behavior in the Medial Temporal
Lobe
ANESTHETIC EFFECTS ON MEDIAL TEMPORAL
LOBE PLASTICITY
GABA-ergic interneurons project within and across sub-
regions of the hippocampus,232 providing an abundant
density of possible targets for anesthetic drugs. In an early
study using tetanic stimulation of the Schaffer collateral-
commissural pathway,233 isoflurane blocked the induction
of LTP, and long-term depression (LTD) by low-frequency
stimulation. These effects were reversed by the addition
of the GABAA receptor antagonist picrotoxin, providing
strong evidence that the effect of isoflurane on LTP is GABA-
ergically mediated. In a similar protocol, amnestic concen-
trations of sevoflurane caused a failure of LTP which was
prevented by the addition of the GABAA antagonist bicucul-
line.234 A recent study of sevoflurane exposure in neonatal
rats found reduced spine density of apical dendrites, synap-
tic ultrastructure damage, elevated expression of synaptic
vesicle-associated proteins, and inhibition of LTP but not
LTD.235 One study of isoflurane, in which the hippocampus
was studied 24 hours following anesthetic exposure, some-
what unexpectedly found improvement in cognitive perfor-
mance, accompanied by evidence of upregulation of the 2B
subunit of the NMDA receptor and enhanced LTP.236
A series of investigations have demonstrated that propo-
fol inhibits the induction, but not the maintenance, of LTP,
and has no effect on LTD. The effect is blocked by the addi-
tion of picrotoxin, implicating a GABAA receptor-mediated
mechanism.237,238 Notably, one study found that propofol
inhibited LTP only at anesthetic, and not at amnestic con-
centrations.238 Propofol has also been demonstrated to
inhibit a number of component subprocesses of LTP. 239-241
Propofol reduces expression of activity-related cytoskeleton-
associated protein (Arc) in the hippocampus in response to
inhibitory avoidance training but does not appear to reduce
Arc mRNA, 202 which is notable because it suggests a post-
transcriptional mechanism.
The hippocampal GABA Aergic interneuron population
is notable for a high density of the α 5-subunit subtype. Of
known significance to memory function, the α5-GABA A
receptor regulates the induction of LTP in response to a
narrow range of frequencies in the theta range.242 These
observations have driven a series of anesthesia studies
using α5-GABAA-knockout mice. Etomidate blocks LTP
measured in CA1 neurons in wild-type mice, but not in α5
–/– mutants, and behaviorally the α5 –/– mutants are resis-
tant to the amnestic effects of etomidate, but not to its gen-
eral anesthetic effects. 243 Further, the effects of etomidate
on LTP and memory behaviors are reversed by the addition
of L-655,708, which selectively reduces the activity of α5-
GABA A receptors. 244 The behavioral findings were later
replicated with exposure to 1 MAC of isoflurane, with mem-
ory deficits observed in wild-type mice, but not in α5 –/–
mutants or in wild types receiving L-655,708.245,246 The
increase in α5-GABA A receptors caused by etomidate and
isoflurane does not return to baseline for at least 1 week.247
The α5-subunit subtype is not exclusive in its association
with amnesia. α4-GABA A receptors are concentrated in the
dentate gyrus and dorsal thalamus, and α4 knockouts are
resistant to the amnestic effects of isoflurane but not to its
general anesthetic effects.248 More equivocally, β3-GABAA
receptor knockout mice have been reported to be resistant to
the amnestic effects of isoflurane,249 while in a study using
β3-GABA A receptor knock-in mutants, the β 3 subtype was
not significantly associated with amnesia.250 Similar equiv-
ocacy has been found in studies of the α1 subtype.251,252
The effects of anesthetics on hippocampal theta oscil-
lations in! vivo have been studied. One study used a fear-
conditioning paradigm to examine amnestic concentration
of isoflurane, nitrous oxide, and halothane, and reported
that suppression of hippocampal-dependent contextual
conditioning was proportionate to slowing of theta peak
frequency.253 Another study also demonstrated that isoflu-
rane caused slowing of theta oscillations in the CA1 neu-
ronal bundle without changing absolute power,254 while
in contrast the nonimmobilizer F6, which causes amnesia
without sedation or a loss of motor activity, caused a loss
of theta oscillatory power without slowing. Scopolamine
causes amnesia at doses associated with acceleration of
theta oscillations, which might otherwise be expected to
improve learning. 255 However, a significant loss of absolute
power is also observed. Together these findings suggest that
individual anesthetics may cause amnesia through distinct
forms of hippocampal theta disruption.!
Human and Nonhuman Studies
of Anesthetic Effects on Fear
Memory Systems
THE AMYGDALA-DEPENDENT FEAR SYSTEM
The amygdala is a cluster of interconnected nuclei sitting
immediately anterior to the hippocampus, with afferent
and efferent projections to a wide distribution of cortical
and subcortical structures. It is critical to fear learning and
memory, and the systematic study of amygdala-dependent
classical (Pavlovian) fear conditioning has produced much
information regarding the mechanisms and circuitry.145,146
The basolateral nucleus of the amygdala (BLA) also mod-
ulates the encoding and consolidation of memory in the

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_014_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

9 • Consciousness, Memory, and Anesthesia 	263
hippocampus and elsewhere in response to emotion,
arousal, and stress.256 The mechanism is dependent on nor-
adrenergic projections terminating on both α and β recep-
tors within the BLA,257 and can be triggered by systemic
stress mediators—notably glucocorticoids258 and epineph-
rine.259 Amygdalo-hippocampal connectivity occurs via
direct and indirect projections, and is dependent on theta
oscillatory synchrony.181,260 The amygdala contains a
number of rational targets for GABA-ergic anesthetic drugs.!
STUDIES OF ANESTHETIC EFFECTS ON FEAR
SYSTEMS IN NONHUMANS
As various forms of fear conditioning represent the domi-
nant experimental method for studying memory in animal
models, almost all studies of anesthetic effects on memory
offer some insight into their effects on fear systems. Beyond
the central conclusion from this sizeable body of literature
that GABA-ergic anesthetics in general impair the acquisi-
tion of fear memory, a subset of studies are notable for their
specific focus on fear circuitry and behavior.
There is substantial evidence that anesthetic effects on
fear memory are mediated by GABA-ergic mechanisms in
the amygdala. Selective injection of the BLA with midazolam
blocks acquisition and stress enhancement of fear mem-
ory,261 while lesions of the BLA block anterograde amnesia
for an inhibitory avoidance task in rats receiving diaze-
pam,262 propofol,263 and sevoflurane.264 Further, injection
of the BLA with the selective GABAA antagonist bicuculline
blocks the effect of propofol202 and midazolam.265
There are certain conditions under which anesthetic
drugs can enhance fear memory. When propofol or ket-
amine is given immediately following conditioning, reten-
tion is enhanced,266,267 which may represent a form of
retrograde facilitation as described earlier, but retention is
reduced when dexmedetomidine is similarly administered.
In a rat model of PTSD, propofol and ketamine administered
immediately after fear learning enhances long-term fear
behavior, while dexmedetomidine has a neutral effect.267
Midazolam given during extinction training, which nor-
mally inhibits learned fear expression, blocks the effect of
extinction,261 and also blocks fear-reducing effects when
given 	during 	preconditioning 	contextual 	learning.268
When sevoflurane is administered at a very low, nonsedat-
ing dose (0.11%), fear conditioning is enhanced.269,270!
STUDIES OF ANESTHETIC EFFECTS ON FEAR
SYSTEMS IN HUMANS
Three 	functional 	neuroimaging 	studies 	have 	directly
addressed anesthetic effects on emotional memory. A study
using PET and path analysis (Fig. 9.5 lower panel)271 demon-
strated that the superior memorability that negatively arous-
ing emotional items have over neutral items was unaffected
by 0.1% and 0.2% sevoflurane, but lost at 0.25%, and was
associated with decreased effective connectivity projecting
from the right amygdala to hippocampus, and also from the
right nucleus basalis to hippocampus. Further, sevoflurane
modulated emotional perception such that items were rated
more neutrally. An fMRI study demonstrated that sedative
doses of propofol do not reduce activation of the amygdala in
response to negatively arousing items, but activation of the
hippocampus is markedly attenuated (see Fig. 9.5 upper panel)
and correlates with amnesia and loss of the superior memora-
bility of emotional material.218 This suggests that cortical and
subcortical processes serving emotional interpretative func-
tions and afferent amygdala activation are relatively spared by
amnestic levels of propofol, while efferent processes underly-
ing amygdala-dependent modulation of hippocampal plastic-
ity are interrupted. An fMRI study of dexmedetomidine also
reported no effect on activation of the amygdala in response to
negatively arousing items,216 but in contrast to propofol, emo-
tional items retained superior memorability, and activation
in the left amygdala and hippocampus were correlated with
subsequent memory. Taken together, these studies imply that
propofol may have a more targeted effect on the amygdalo-hip-
pocampal modulatory axis. One potential explanation is that
amygdalo-hippocampal connectivity is markedly interrupted
by a loss of theta oscillatory synchrony caused by propofol,
whereas α2A antagonism at the LC causes only limited down-
stream attenuation of noradrenergic signaling in the BLA.!
CLINICAL RELEVANCE
Amygdala reactivity is of importance in a number of fear-
based psychopathologies, including anxiety, phobia, panic
disorder, and PTSD.272 The neurohumoral stress response
to surgery and critical illness can cause complex changes in
levels of catecholamines, glucocorticoids, and other poten-
tial promoters of plasticity in amygdala-dependent fear
processes, occurring within a context that frequently con-
tains emotional stressors. It is unclear under what specific
conditions elevated (or depressed) levels of these mediators
might contribute to long-term changes in neuropsychologi-
cal functioning, although multiple studies in the critical care
setting relate stress exposure, and exogenous administration
of catecholamines, to negative long-term outcomes.273 In a
broad surgical population, the incidence of PTSD-complex
symptoms related to surgery was reported to be 16%5—simi-
lar to that observed in victims of violence. The effect—or lack
of effect—of anesthetic drugs on plasticity processes in the
perioperative or critical care setting thus has a theoretical
potential to impact long-term psychological sequelae, both
positively and negatively. However, there is presently insuf-
ficient human data to inform specific recommendations.!
Anesthetic Effects on Implicit
Memory Function
Implicit (nondeclarative) memory processes do not axiom-
atically require a conscious substrate, and are not depen-
dent on classic hippocampal plasticity. Therefore the effect
of anesthetic drugs on implicit memory functions may have
important distinction from those on declarative memory,
and accordingly a number of investigations have sought
evidence for implicit processing in unconscious subjects.
Many studies have used auditory adaptations of the word
stem completion task, or the more rigorous process dissocia-
tion procedure, in which subjects are asked to exclude items
that have been presented; declarative memory will drive
avoidance of the target word, while implicit memory will
lead to a familiarity response favoring the target word.

=== ID: Millers_Anaesthesia_9th_Edition_Chapter_9.pdf_PAGE_015_full ===
=== TOPIC: General ===

SECTION II • Anesthetic Physiology	264
Two early studies in patients undergoing coronary
artery274 and gynecologic 275 procedures showed evi-
dence of implicit learning using word stem completion
tasks. Another early study demonstrating implicit recall
in cardiac surgery patients correlated performance with
preservation of the midlatency auditory evoked potential,
and most strongly with the early cortical Pa and Na com-
plexes.276 Later studies demonstrated implicit memory in
both trauma patients277 and patients undergoing an emer-
gency cesarean section278 using the process dissociation
procedure, and further demonstrated that the degree of pro-
cessing is related to the bispectral index. However, multiple
more recent studies using similar procedures have either
failed to show significant implicit priming effects or have
been equivocal. 279-281 Synthesis of these disparate results
into a cohesive conclusion is difficult. Although differences
in patient populations and anesthetic regimens may be of
relevance, methodological challenges may have driven
both false positive and false negative results. Investigations
evaluating implicit memory processes in pediatric patients
under anesthesia have also offered conflicting results. One
study reported an increased ability to distinguish a primed
animal sound from white noise,282 but other investigations
found no evidence of priming.283–285
Complete references available online at expertconsult.com.
NBM
L 	R
–36 	–33 	–30
–7
–4
7
4
0 	3 	6
–36 	–33 	–30 	0 	3 	6
L 	R 	L 	R
NBM 	NBM 	NBM 	NBM 	NBM
Amyg	Amyg	Amyg	Amyg	Amyg	Amyg
A
1
2
B 	C
Thal 	Thal 	Thal
Hipp	Hipp	Hipp	Hipp	Hipp	Hipp
LC 	LC	0.01–0.30
0.31–0.60
0.61–1.00
LC
Fig. 9.5 Anesthetic effects on emotional memory systems. (upper panel) Functional magnetic resonance imaging scans showing the contrast in
response to negatively arousing items relative to neutral items, with coronal slices through the amygdala (0, 3, 6) and hippocampus (−30, −33, −36). The
control condition (top row) shows enhanced activation of both the amygdala and hippocampus in response to the added emotional information, while
in subjects receiving propofol (bottom row) there is enhanced activation of the amygdala, but not of the hippocampus. (lower panel) Path diagrams of
connectivity at rest, with positive influences of one region onto another shown as solid lines, negative influences shown as dotted lines, and width rep-
resenting magnitude. In the control condition (A) there is a significant positive influence of the amygdala onto the hippocampus bilaterally. Administra-
tion of sevoflurane 0.25% (B) blocks emotional modulation behaviorally, and removes the positive influence of the right amygdala and nucleus basalis
of Meynert on the hippocampus. Numerical differences in path weight (C) show these two paths to significantly contribute to the network model more
in the control than sevoflurane state. Amyg, Amygdala; Hipp, hippocampus; LC, locus ceruleus; NBM, nucleus basalis of Meynert; Thal, thalamus. ([A]
Modified from Pryor KO, Root JC, Mehta M, et al. Effect of propofol on the medial temporal lobe emotional memory system: a functional magnetic resonance
imaging study in human subjects. Br J Anaesth. 2015;115[suppl 1]:i104–i113, Figure 3; [B] Modified from Alkire MT, Gruver R, Miller J, et al. Neuroimaging analysis
of an anesthetic gas that blocks human emotional memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105[5]:1722–1727, Figure 5.)

